Afternoon, uh, session of this select committee.
I think we've got Christchurch City Council with us now.
Yes, we do. And can you hear me?
Yes, we can hear and see you. Welcome.
Great. Uh, Thanks for joining us.
We've got 10 minutes to hear from you, just by the way,
and welcome to use all of that time if you wish.
Great. Good afternoon, Madam Chair, members
of the committee and Mike Davidson.
A special hello from, uh, sunny Christchurch.
My name is Brendan Winder.
I manage to civil defense emergency management team
here at Crosser City Council.
And thanks for the opportunity to speak to this bill.
Christchurch city council supports modernizing New Zealand's
emergency management law.
The risk landscape has changed.
We face more frequent weather, ongoing seismic risk,
and more complex compounding, consecutive
and cascading risks that stack up and spill over.
We need a clearer system that builds capability.
Our submission focuses on improvement.
We support the direction of travel.
Our concern is simple and twofold.
Can what parliament intends actually be delivered
and how will it be funded?
Emergency management comes in four parts, reduction,
readiness, response and recovery, excuse me.
And day-to-day community facing
work reduction and readiness matter.
Most, they cost much less than response and recovery,
and they build resilience before disaster strikes.
But the builders that wait to these two areas,
it leans heavily towards response and recovery.
That misses a chance to prevent the
very outcomes that that drove.
This reform readiness only works
when expectations are clear.
Plans are tests that in capability can be shown in practice.
High level plans on the shelf do not build resilience.
If the, if the system keeps valuing documents over local
preparedness, we may stay stuck in response mode.
We'll keep reacting instead of reducing risk before it hits.
If Parliament wants reduction in readiness in the form
of the in front of the system, the law
and its regulations must set out miserable expectations.
They must also be clear about who pays.
The bill requires national and regional plans on their own.
These have limited impact locally.
A framework that includes local planning would give agencies
and communities a clear line of sight
and make plans work in practice as drafted.
The planning reforms risk a gap
between formal plans and real world delivery.
If capability sits locally,
accountability must also sit locally.
Otherwise, when performance is tested,
ownership will be blurred.
The bill strengthens the director general's powers
to drive national consistency, and that is appropriate.
But councilors do need to see the assurance framework.
If compliance powers increase, monitoring
and expectations must also be transparent.
Councils need to know what will be measured, how often,
and against what benchmark benchmarks.
Without their clarity, investment becomes
reactive and less effective.
A predictable and proportional assurance regime support,
steady improvement, operational guidance also needs care.
Emergency management is not just about strategy,
it's also practical, pragmatic and time critical.
Interoperability standards
and clear doctrines shake
what happens in a remote community at 2:00 AM in a
storm, for example.
Changing controller role names without aligning them
with the emergency services creates more confusion.
This defeats the purpose of the bill.
National guidance must stay grounded in local operations.
If new structures and roles lift expectations, standards
and templates must be co-designed and aligned.
Workforce capability and capacity cannot be built overnight.
The biggest fiscal risk in this bill sits in the
broad rulemaking powers.
Regulations can set in technical standards,
training requirements, and reporting duties over time.
These can grow without changes to the act.
Consultation matters, but it does not control cost.
If compliance expectations rise, cost impacts, safeguards
and clear funding rules must also strengthens.
Councils need to know what is required
by when and who will fund it.
This brings us to the central tension in the bill.
The bill lists expectations across governance, planning,
assurance, and work face workforce capability.
At the same time, go government signals, rates,
keeping and tighter fiscal limits.
For councils, this creates a structural clash.
Councils asked to do more
with their main revenue tool was constrained.
This is not abstract. Emergency management relies on people.
It needs train controllers, recovery manage planners,
community engagement specialists, and tested arrangements.
The bill assumes as capable exists or it can scale quickly.
Nationally, that depth does not
yet exist at the level implied.
If consistency is the goal, co-investment must be a part
of the answer without uplift will be slow and uneven.
Consistency without funding creates compliance risk.
And more importantly, capability gaps.
We welcome the bill's, focus on communities
that are disproportionately affected.
Meaningful engagement, however, it takes time
and skilled people to enable councils
to deepen engagement with vulnerable communities.
Funding must match that expectation.
Otherwise, engagement risks becoming a box ticking exercise.
We support more inclusive,
inclusive governance structures mandates authority
and funding responsibilities must also be clear.
Complexity should not turn, turn into confusion.
The legislation will shape New Zealand's
emergency management system for decades.
It is a significant step forward.
Its success would depend less on structure
and more about how it's put into practice.
The core question for us is straightforward.
If Parliament wants higher
and more consistent capability across the country,
who will fund that uplift?
Christchurch City Council supports modernization.
We support stronger reduction in readiness.
We support national consistency.
We ask that funding assurance
and accountability match the bill's ambition.
Thank you. Happy to take questions.
Thank you so much for your submission
and just wondering to acknowledge, um,
in your written submission
and also recently just the, uh, issues in Peninsula
that have been, um, that you've been dealing with
and, uh, that it's obviously been a really, uh, tough time
to also make a submission to the committee too,
but really appreciate the, the effort of making that.
I'll just check with committee members if they have,
um, some questions.
Looks like Mike has a question. Mike. And then Melissa.
Thank, thank you. And you, you've made it very clear some
of the, the points, especially around
that co-investment when we're looking
to do risk reduction as well.
Um, I I guess one of the things I in Christchurch has been
through a lot of events over the last 15 years.
Um, and like, are we developing, I guess, legislation
that will ensure that we, we get lessons that are learned.
Uh, I implemented into future planning events.
Do you think the legislation will ensure that happens?
Uh, no. Um,
the lessons learned should be built into legislation.
So that's a gap in the, uh,
in the current bill that needs to be fixed.
Uh, and I don't think it's a big deal, um, to do that.
And anyone I've spoken to in the
sector thinks this is a good idea.
So building in that lessons learned into legislation,
I think would be easy.
Um, simple, uh, and have significant impact.
Thanks, Melissa.
On mute hand down. Hey, thank you so much.
And I echo, um, my colleagues comments regarding, um, some
of the terrible situations
that Christchurch has actually faced over so many years.
Um, I'm particularly interested in your comment in regards
to, um, the box ticking exercise.
What do you see as a solution so
that it doesn't become a box ticking exercise in terms
of engagement and all
of those things that you're talking about?
Um, co-design, I think's the, uh, the
feature there we'd like to see. Um, so,
So when you say co-design,
I mean who's involved and with whom? What are you doing?
So all four elements of the mid team management, um,
framework in New Zealand.
So, um, so starting at the most important part in the
community, um, having them being a part of the design,
um, of this as well.
And then locally, regionally, and nationally.
Um, there is, there has historically been a tendency
to go top down and that's turned it into box tick exercise.
If we invert the pyramid involved the community
and coming through regional and national as well.
And I think you'll find much more
buy-in once you've got buy-in.
Um, the standards
and, uh, doctrine are far more likely
to be used rather than, um, pushing it down.
If you grow it from bottom up, you'll get more buy-in.
Yep. So I, I, I get what you're saying,
but in reality, how do you actually see that working,
considering the fact that not every citizen's going
to participate and the amount of work
that's actually involved in, in terms
of consulting, everyone.
So how do you actually design something like
that in your mind and how long is it going to take?
Yeah, I dunno the answer to that.
Um, one of the big challenges
around emergency management is we get, um, limited cut
through, uh, for years and years
and years in New Zealand, we've been talking about get
ready, get through and long and strong get gone.
And still we have a very low amount
of people in the country, um,
that understand those very basic sort of, um, mantras.
Um, doing the same thing with,
with legislation will be even harder, I suspect.
I dunno the answer to that question.
Thanks. Thank you so much.
We have now reached the end of our time,
but really appreciate, uh, you being with us today
and, um, finding time to write a written submission
during all of the, um,
emergencies that you've been dealing
with. Really appreciate it.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you so much.
We now have our next, uh, submitter, uh, who is,
uh, Dr. David Wilson.
Good afternoon. Joining us from Parliament.
Uh, welcome to the Governance and Administration Committee.
Uh, and we've received your written submission,
which is very interesting.
Uh, and we've got 10 minutes to hear from you,
but we'll, if you want to maybe leave some time
for questions at the end, I'm sure members will have, um,
some for you over to you.
Okay. Well look, thanks very much
for the opportunity to make the submission.
Uh, and it relates to three topics, um, which i,
I'll cover fairly briefly
and then I'm happy to take questions.
So the three topics are how to change the place of meeting
of Parliament during a state of national emergency.
Um, how to best affect the recall
of the house if it's adjourned,
and it's the state of national emergencies declared
and also raises some points about parliamentary scrutiny
of emergency management system documents.
So at the outset, it just make the point in the submission,
it's primarily the government's role to respond
to emergencies, but Parliament does have a key role
to play in emergencies in terms of being informed about them
and scrutinizing the response, um, in terms of legislating
for emergency powers
and approving expenditure, representing the public,
of course, and, uh, considering states
of national emergency, which is legislated for.
So the first, uh, issue, um, around altering the place
of meeting for parliament is something
that was first highlighted in the
business continuity planning
that the parliamentary service office of the clerk
and relevant government departments have been carrying out
in preparation for, um, well, hopefully something
that never happens, but a, a disaster
that particularly affects Wellington to the point
where it's unsafe or uninhabitable.
Um, so Parliament has to sit within seven days
of the declaration of a state of national emergency.
It's the case now where the case under this
bill when it's enacted as well.
And it must sit in the parliamentary precinct
that is set in the proclamation by the Governor General, um,
after an election, uh, that requires parliament
to meet in the precinct.
So, uh, as things currently stand,
if the buildings here are unsafe
or are uninhabitable,
we'd need another proclamation from the Governor General to,
uh, to alter that meeting place.
And there's quite a few steps involved in
that proclamation process.
Um, I've detailed those on page three in the submission.
Um, and I don't need to go over them now,
but what I'm really proposing is a faster alternative, um,
in a narrow set of circumstances.
So having consulted the Prime Minister during a state
of national emergency,
and for a limited amount of time if the buildings are unsafe
or uninhabitable, the speaker could simply issue a notice
changing the place of meeting.
One of the advantages of the speaker doing that is
that notice would take effect immediately, uh,
and it would give the parliamentary agencies more time
to set up an alternative parliament, which is going
to be in another city, um,
or in a, in another place in Wellington potentially.
Um, one of the strengths of this approach, um, as a result
of the Parliament Act this was, was passed late last year,
is, um, not only can the speaker do this,
but if the speaker is not available, uh, the deputy speaker,
any of the three assistant speakers can act
for the speaker fully,
which means you've got five people there, um,
who could potentially do this, uh, in an emergency.
Uh, and those people are also dispersed around the country,
which is, which is useful in an emergency
that particularly affected Wellington.
None of this would alter the ability of the Governor General
to make proclamations, to amend existing ones
and to make new ones.
They would still need to do that, uh, say
after an emergency where parliament had relocated, um,
to call it back to Wellington, for example.
Uh, and it's not supposed to sort
of derogate the Governor General's responsibilities, um,
or powers, but really
to create a faster alternative in this sort of emergency
where time is of the essence,
parliament must sit within seven days.
And, um, we need as much of that time as possible to, uh,
to, um, make arrangements for that to happen.
Of course, you know, arrangements are made anyway,
but they can never be, uh, precise, um,
until we actually know what sort
of emergency we're dealing with.
So, so that's the, the first proposal.
And I guess I think the most significant one
in order to do that.
Um, that's not something that's provided for in the bill.
It would need an amendment to the Constitution Act.
Um, so the committee would need to write
to the business committee and ask if you want to do this,
um, for the bill to, uh, for it to agree for the bill
to be an omnibus bill so that it can amend,
uh, two different acts.
Uh, 'cause it doesn't do that at the moment.
Um, the next one about early recall.
So Clause 111 six of the bill requires the speaker
to recall the house to sit within seven days
of a declaration of a state
of national emergency if the house is adjourned.
That recall notice also has to be published in the Gazette.
Um, what I'm suggesting here is, is that the way
that power is exercised, um, is aligned with the power
and standing order 55, which the speaker generally has
to recall Parliament earlier, if it's adjourned.
It was used during COVID-19, um, for the house
to sit when it was adjourned, it came back to sit really,
and the speaker's able to do that, um, at the request
of the Prime Minister without
publishing a notice in the Gazette.
And again, I'm just concerned that that publication process
in a serious disaster, uh, might be difficult to do.
Um, this could be a faster alternative.
Um, it still leaves this, the decision making
with the same person, the speaker, um,
and it aligns with, uh, existing powers,
the speaker currently exercises.
Again, it would enable, enable us to act on
that notice immediately it having been made.
Um, and there's a, a proposal in there as well
that I could gazette that notice afterwards just
to make sure that people, uh, knew that this had happened,
you know, for the public record.
Uh, the final point is just around scrutiny.
Um, so currently the National Civil Defense Emergency
Management Plan has to be presented to the House,
and the House can resolve not to approve it.
Um, the 2019 strategy was scrutinized
by the Governance Administration Committee heard evidence on
it, about 120 submissions and reported to the house.
Um, the current, the,
the new legislation clause of 77
to 79 don't require the strategy to be presented
to the house or for any kind
of approval process by the house.
And, and I do think, um, at a minimum
the the new strategy should be presented to the house.
Uh, you could consider whether that should be in a draft
for approval or in its final form.
Um, I'm not convinced that that mechanism
for not approving it is, is really that necessary.
But I would just go back to what my predecessor,
David McGee said in 2002 when he suggested the script
parliamentary scrutiny of it, of the strategy, um,
presentation to the house ensures
that an important subject gets some parliamentary attention,
um, that otherwise might not get,
certainly national emergencies, um, get attention
while it happened in their, in their aftermath.
They don't get that much attention in between.
And I, I think we'd be missing an
opportunity for that to happen.
Um, the final part
of the submission is just some suggestions to ensure
that the strategy does get parliamentary attention.
One is, uh, and these are things you could raise
from the Standing Orders Committee.
Um, one is that we have special debates on, um,
emergency preparedness.
Um, and another is around presentation and,
and referral to this committee, uh, of the, uh, strategy.
Um, and also schedule four of the bill has some new kinds
of reporting, um, about states of national emergency
and national transition periods.
Uh, so consider also whether they should be referred, uh,
uh, referred to a committee, which could be done
by just amending, uh, the,
the appendix to the standing orders.
And as you know, the review
of standing orders is going on now,
so there's a good opportunity to do it.
So those are the three things I wanted to raise,
and I'd be happy to take
any questions the committee might have.
Thank you. Thanks David.
Um, I did have a few questions that I colleagues may have
as well, just in the few minutes that we have.
Mm-hmm. The, um, Melissa
and I were, um, at parliamentarians when we had the COVID
lockdowns and obviously we had remote sitting.
I just wondered, um, it seems
to me if there was some reason not to be able
to sit in Wellington, that, um, you know,
standing up some kind of remote, um, parliament might be,
um, uh, a practical option, uh, did, is that something
that you think should be, um, considered within this bill?
Uh, I don't, um, it probably doesn't need
to generally be considered in the bill
and I, yeah, it is, uh, one of the options I think in,
in an emergency, um, is to stand up a,
a virtual parliament as well.
Um, I think the key thing though is that even in that case
and where we did have people meeting virtually during COVID,
we still had a speaker
and a minister in the clerk in Parliament House
because the proclamation said
that's where parliament must meet.
And the way we were treating it
as parliament is meeting in Parliament House,
some members are coming in remotely.
So if we had to completely abandon these buildings,
we'd still need some kind of mechanism
to decide to meet somewhere else.
So, yeah, I think, you know, remote participation could be
an option, but we'd still need that setting.
The, the other thing where I just, I know that you've put,
um, for the scrutiny of the, um,
emergency management plan mm-hmm.
Uh, there was one part where you, where you said that,
oh no, sorry, I think it was the location of the, um,
new parliament that there would be consultation
with the Prime Minister.
And I just wondered, um, I just wondered if there,
that would be also whether you considered consulting like
the leader of the oppositional other parliamentary, um,
leaders, uh, in terms of kind
of getting some cross party consensus if there was a,
a new location at all, or whether that would be appropriate.
Yeah, I think that would be appropriate.
The, the main reason for including the Prime Minister is,
um, we wanted to address any concerns
that doing this would cut the executive out of, uh,
you know, planning for, for the move.
Obviously the executive's part of Parliament, well,
it's elected members are, um, so it's not
as if it wouldn't know, but, um,
the executive also leads the response and,
and I guess logistically would be required to be involved.
I don't think there's any difficulty with consulting,
um, further than that.
The Prime Minister and the leader of the opposition
or the party leaders of parties in Parliament, um,
we just need, something can be done reasonably quickly.
So, um, I know for the, uh, in the case
of the Prime Minister, there are also, you know,
plans in place if, if,
because there is a cabinet which has a sort of a, a line
of succession in it, there are other people
that can be consulted if the Prime Minister's not available.
Um, so I just wouldn't want it to,
if if there were more people consulted, I wouldn't want that
to be, to take so long, um, as
to hold up the response. Yeah,
No, that's a really good point.
Uh, that is, I think we're at time now.
Um, David, so thank you so much for that,
a really interesting submission
and we'll, we'll get some follow up advice on that
with officials, uh, after we finish
hearing the submissions today.
Okay. Thanks for your time. Thank you so much. Okay, thanks.
Our next, uh, submitters are from Radio New Zealand.
I believe they're available.
I think we've got, um, you there,
but we've, we've also got you on mute and we can't see you.
Oh, fantastic. Okay.
We can see you now and you're off mute,
so you're quite a little bit far away though.
Um, so you might need to just, um, that's fine.
But, um, just, yeah, so we've got, um,
Paul there just looking quite small.
Yes, full tops. Okay, fantastic. Uh, thank you so much.
Um, and Kate, is that right? Yeah, yeah.
Kia, thank you for your written submission.
Really interesting points raised.
Uh, we've had an opportunity to look at that
and we've got 10 minutes, uh, to hear from you today.
And feel free to leave some time
for questions at the end. Over to you.
Uh, thank you. Thanks to the committee for the opportunity
to submit on this important piece of legislation.
I'm Paul Thompson, the Chief Executive
and editor-in-chief of RNZ.
And along with side with me today is Kate Gutsel,
our emergency planning manager.
I'll make a couple of comments just to set the context
of why this is so important for RNZ
and then Kate will go into the detail.
Uh, we'll be brief 'cause we do want
to have time for questions.
Uh, the lifeline role that we have,
the statutory lifeline role that we have
of keeping New Zealanders informed
and safe during moments of crisis
and emergency is absolutely core to our, our DNA.
Whenever we have new staff members start at RNZ on the first
day, they, uh, are briefed on that
and get tuned into that expectation,
which is so core for us.
So this is a topic which is really close to our heart.
We take that responsibility really seriously.
This year alone, there's been nine local states of emergency
that's within a couple of months.
Um, and I know you're all aware of this
and our strategy as the public media organization
is acknowledging the growing, um, frequency of those events
and the big premium on us to provide
that trusted information.
Um, the new legislation defines essential infrastructure as
that which underpins public order
or safety, public health, national security, the functioning
of the economy of society.
So RNZ contributes to all of those,
particularly in those moments of crisis.
Um, so really what we want to do today is, uh,
give you feedback on the bill, be very specific about, um,
some res requests we are going to respectfully make
because alongside that need for us to be
that information lifeline, we need
to safeguard our editorial independence
'cause that underpins public trust.
And that's the key point we want you to think about today.
And I'll hand over to my colleague Kate
to go into some of the detail. Thank you.
Thanks, Paul. Thanks.
Thanks Paul. Um, I just wanted to touch on two points,
really, the editorial independence
and our operational, uh, independence in terms
of the editorial independence, our role
as emergency broadcasters comes into play right when our
communities need us most,
and they really need to trust
what they're hearing for from us.
And even the kind of perception
that our editorial independence might be undermine
undermines our role in, uh,
underpinning the normal functioning of society
and social cohesion.
So what we were really hoping within that, um, bell would be
to have a carve out of for us as,
and recognizing our unique position as a media entity.
Um, we understand obviously that there's infrastructure
that we provide, but we're right at the
cascading end of that.
There's no inter interdependencies on, um, on us.
Um, so carving out our role to kind of reflect the fact
that we do have quite a unique role within the EIP PS I
think would be really, um, useful.
Uh, we're not work asking for sort of wholesale change
or anything, but just probably a clause somewhere in there
that recognizes our unique role.
I think that's really important.
And in terms of operat the operational side, um,
particularly sort of section 74
and um, sections 1 0 4 to 1 0 6, which are all about EIP,
uh, plans and sector planning, we totally understand
and recognize the need to have feedback
and interaction with officials,
particularly getting information from them
that will be relevant for our operations
and feeding information back to them
and the cycle that that involves.
But we feel that it's really important
that our technical expertise is recognized
and that it's not, we're not directed our operational, um,
operational, um, functions in terms
of our transmission sites aren't sub directed by officials.
And I think it would be really useful to have some kind of
standards, specific standards
that are overlaid in those one sections, 1 0 4, 1 0 6,
and 74 that, um, have made a consultation
with the emergency broadcasters.
Um, and I also think it would be important to recognize
that some of our workers are essential workers,
particularly the transmission site, the people
who work on transmission sites and the contractors.
That has been a big problem in the past.
I know the former iteration of the bill had some recognition
of that, but I can't see it in the, the,
this most recent iteration.
So I think it, that is another really important factor
and a standardized approach to ID as well across,
across the country would be really useful.
Uh, those are the points that I really wanted to hit on.
Um, so, uh, open to questions.
Thank you so much, appreciate that.
Um, I think, I mean, I think your submission is really
interesting and I just wanted to, um,
ask a wee bit about the independence point.
So, um, is, is the risk, I suppose, that you see
with the bill that people may see that, um,
radio New Zealand is a kind of a mouthpiece
for the official response?
Is that the kind of concern, and,
and I suppose a supplementary question to that is, are the,
it seems to me that the changes
that you're suggesting wouldn't hamper, um, the kind
of key communication role that RNZ has.
It would just, um, mean that, uh,
you have a bit more independence
or is that, is that not correct?
Just wanting to just unpack the kind of risk
to editorial independence that you've raised.
Yeah, I think you, I think you've hit the nail on the
head, um, Camilla, that, um, it's that perception
that we could be directed at editorial coverage could
be directed by that.
And I don't think the changes
that we are suggesting will have any kind of, um,
really knock on effect on anybody else.
But it would be really clear to everyone who read the bill
that there was no one, no one could come in
and direct us on how we cover an event,
because obviously there's the initial response,
but then there's the ongoing recovery.
Um, so we would always wanna make sure that
that was protected
and that there was no potential for misperception around
our editorial independence.
And that we are have, uh, the ability to report freely
and frankly on all the events.
It's just, if I can make one comment in a, in a crisis,
part of what we do is distribute that official
sanctioned information, which people need to know.
Um, but alongside that, we interrogate and we question
and we provide context
and we do interviews and we drill down.
We need to be able to do both
and making sure that, uh, there's no perception
that we're merely the first,
because I think public trust, new Zealanders expect us
to ask questions and ask the hard questions,
particularly at difficult times.
So it's striking the balance between the two
and just safeguarding our independence,
because once that's compromised, it's very hard to repair.
Thank you, Melissa.
Unmute. Um, I, first of all, nice to see you both.
Um, I don't think anyone, uh, in New Zealand will actually,
uh, mistake RNZ to be, uh,
the mouthpiece for our government.
So I think you are, you are at, you know,
you should actually rest at these.
The question I had is actually a supplementary question to
what kalo, uh, Ms.
Uh, chair actually was asking you in terms
of the independence issue.
Kate, you actually talked about you needed a car.
Can you actually explain what you actually mean?
Well, I think that the EIP PS capture a whole range of
and essential infrastructure.
And my understanding of the bill is
that it's also the intention is to introduce, um, even more,
um, entities that in different, different sectors into the,
into the legislation as the EIP ps.
And I feel like that some of the rules
or regulations that could be introduced will be for specific
entities and that may capture RNZ,
but also I think that really,
I guess ring fencing RNZ as an entity
that has a unique position to, to protect it from some
of the things that some of the rules
and regulations that could come in, come into play, some
of which there isn't clarity on as well.
Sorry, but, but yeah, I'm a little bit confused still.
Right. Well, I think that what we want to do is to, if we
as an, if we're considered an E ip,
it should be really clear that say,
I mean there might be like, I think,
So you're saying RZ should be the only one
who should be excluded from that requirement. Okay. No,
No. Emerge, I mean, that's
for the, um, committee
to weigh up obviously,
but committee, we're not saying that, um,
this is about RNZ definitely wants that, um, dispensation,
but it doesn't mean that others won't qualify.
We're not the only emergency broadcasters,
but we're just coming this from our perspective.
Thanks. Right. Thank you.
Yeah, we'll we can maybe follow that up with the officials
as well, but I think that's really
helpful to get those points for you.
So thank you both so much for joining us today.
Thank you. Thank you. All work. Thank you. Cheers. Bye.
Right, our next submitters, I believe are with us
and they're Otago Waste Network.
We'll just see if they are joining us. We've got them there.
Just need to, uh, turn on. Oh, fantastic.
Thank you. Welcome. We can see you there now.
Thank you so much.
Today We've got a copy of your written, uh,
two written submissions
and, um, we, uh, have got 10 minutes to hear from you today.
So I think it's Anna, isn't it Anna? Correct,
Yes, it's Anna. Um,
To you Anna.
Thank you, Camilla. There should just be
one written submission.
Uh, the, the, yeah.
And just to clarify, there's two submissions from Dunedin.
Well, there's one submission from Dunedin city council
and then there's a second submission from myself, which
partly represents Dunedin City Council Waste Offices. Okay.
We'll sort that out with the staff
afterwards. No problem. Thank
You. Thank you.
Yeah, just want to really clarify that one.
Thank you so much. Um, so thank you to the Governance
and Administration Committee for providing opportunity
to speak to our submission on the emergency management Bill
Koto, Anna Roberton.
I'm the Regional Waste Officer for, for Otago.
And today I speak to the Tgo Waste Network submission
provided on February 13th, which is representative
of the views of the waste officers from Klu, central Otago,
Queenstown Lakes, WITA District Councils,
and the Dunedin City Council, as outlined in our submission
to the emergency management bill Vision two,
the Waste Offices of Targa Councils, which
to see resource recovery
and waste disposal facilities included in the proposed
legislation under three critical infrastructure.
We see waste infrastructure is a critical
enabler of recovery.
The national infrastructure plan
and the national Policy Statement
for infrastructure recognized waste assets is
important to our nation's.
Productivity is a driver for economic growth,
supporting wellbeing, as well as helping our communities
to achieve broader social and environmental goals.
Our communities are reliant on a series
of interdependent infrastructure
and services waste the collection, the treatment
and disposal infrastructure
and services are ubiquitous for so many of our communities.
We know that the volume of waste in normal conditions is
something that most Kiwis are unaware of.
However, through a number
of devastating events experienced across Al Toyota
and New Zealand Bury Earthquakes
and the Cyclone Gabrielle inhale to name just a few.
The scale of waste created from disaster requires better
consideration and subsequent
management for the benefit of all.
And that is really broad.
It's the personnel who are working in that response
and recovery space, the communities who are affected
and directly impacted,
which includes the economy and the environment.
So hence we call on you to add resource recovery
and waste disposal facilities as critical infrastructure
of the proposed legislation.
I just wanna make a note here that in the interest of time,
I'm now gonna refer to Resource Recovery
and Waste Disposal facilities
as Waste infrastructure For the remainder
of my speaking time today, emergency management legislation
could support our local bodies
with adequate pre-planning provisions.
So if this would medicate,
mitigate mismanaged waste from disaster events such
as poorly placed temporary
and long-term disposal sites, harm to people
and environment would be minimized through better planning,
along with more efficient resumption of essential services.
So recognition of waste infrastructure
and services would support planning as well
as preparation exercises, ensuring inclusion
of this critical component to disaster response
and recovery during any pre-event planning and enabling
and consistent planning approach,
which considers waste infrastructure
and services as part of emergency management planning would
support outcomes aligned with essential services
as described in the proposed legislation,
effective waste management directly impacts on public order
public safety, public health,
and the functioning of the economy
and society for al New Zealand.
Further to the inclusion of waste infrastructure as part
of emergency planning preparedness, the funding resourcing
and imple implementation impacts
for councils require consideration given other legislative
changes and the expected impacts on council's abilities
to deliver these requisite services.
We're in favor of integrating waste infrastructure
and services into the efficiency planning processes.
Further enhancing the premise of the four Rs,
including waste infrastructure and services, would support
and allow for readiness plans, which include a standardized,
standardized response across regions.
Whilst allowing for some regional variation would provide
more certainty to protocols.
The response teams who are called upon for support from
outside of regions during emergencies could work more
effectively and reduce the burden on existing members
involved in the space response space.
Again, response effective response to
during a declared emergency where authorized waste
operators are allowed access to certain areas
would minimize public health risks,
improve environmental impacts
and support resumption of other essential services
for clearance of problematic wastes such as debris and tres.
The safe and timely clearance
of disaster waste would give regard to public safety.
And health waste is already recognized
as having public health links
through the Waste Minimization Act, which requires councils
to seek approval from the medical officer of health
for their waste, waste management
and minimization plans in recovery.
The effective response and recovery would avoid delays in
resum resumption of services,
which includes those waste services.
I'd just like to highlight a target's geographic
and personnel changes as I feel like this can be, um,
improved through this proposed legislation.
We have relatively small
and remote communities who are at risk of being cut off
through infrastructure failures following any number
of emergency situations.
And these could be better planned
and provisioned for if waste infrastructure was considered
within the essential infrastructure schedule to plan
and respond effectively.
Regarding disaster waste materials
and municipal waste movements would enable our communities
to resume normal daily activities as quickly as possible,
achieving some of those broader social
and environmental goals such as wellbeing,
local economic activities, and so on.
Additionally, our small local authorities who are limited
with resourcing and staffing could work
with more confidence if a planning framework
and support structure including resource were provided.
This would create consistency in this space
of pre-disaster planning.
Currently this space is reliant on the right personnel,
making the right connections
and contributions where they can.
Finally, without a coordinated approach,
there is a higher likelihood of needing to create ad hoc,
poorly cited emergency disposal sites that will add
to our burden of legacy landfill sites
for future generations.
Our call on you to amend the proposed emergency management
legislation is a simple one,
which would provide confidence in planning
and consistency in response and recovery.
And New Zealand knows all too well the devastation which
disasters cause and the resulting impacts of wage waste,
which unleash well planned for
and manage can create financial, social,
and environmental burdens.
Thank you. Thank you so much for that. I'll
Just check to see if, uh,
any other members have any questions.
We've got a question from Mike Davidson.
Thank you for your submission.
It's very clear, just, just checking like,
'cause it's come from the Otago region.
Have you also spoken to other waste offices across,
I guess the country and are there views similar?
Yes, I have spoken. So, um, uh, all
of our Otago councils are members of WASTEMAN nz.
There is a disaster waste working group who have
provided a lot of information
and my understanding might without having spoken to each
and every one of the waste offices from around New Zealand,
the feeling by and large is that, um, including
waste infrastructure within
that critical infrastructure framework would really support
that pre-planning space that, uh, we mentioned.
Thank you so much. Thank you so much for joining us today,
Anna, and for your, uh, detailed submission
and, uh, we really appreciate you being with us today and,
and your, um, participation with the committee.
Thank you. Right.
I think we'll just check
to see if we've got our next submitters,
which I think are Hamilton City Council.
Just invite them to join the panel.
Welcome Mayor Macondo.
I think we can see you there, but you're on mute
and you may want to turn your camera on.
Fantastic. We can see you and hopefully hear you.
Sure. Madam Chair, you can hear me?
Yes, we can hear you. Thank you so much.
Uh, we've, uh, thank you for joining us.
Um, I'll leave you to, um, introduce your team
and we've got a copy of your very detailed, uh,
written submission that we've had a opportunity
to have a look through
and we've got 10 minutes with you, so over to you.
Sure. Anyan Hassel and good afternoon to you all.
Lovely to see some familiar faces online.
Um, thank you for the opportunity.
We know that you are having a pretty grueling day
of submission, so we'll try to be quick and crisp.
I'm joined in my office by, uh, councilor Emma Pike,
who is both the chair of Hamilton City Council's Community
Committee and also the chair
of the Waikato Civil Defense Emergency Management Joint
Committee, and also Kelvin Powell, who is the director
of our Safety and Resilience Unit,
and who's been very busy in recent weeks with the, uh, um,
unfortunate, uh, emergencies
that have been occurring in our wider region.
Uh, just to summarize as quickly as we can,
Hamilton City Council is strongly in support of the intent
of the emergency management bill number two,
and the direction that it sets for a more modern,
resilient emergency management system.
Recent events across New Zealand,
and as I've mentioned, especially in our wider region,
have certainly demonstrated
that emergencies are becoming more frequent, more complex
and more demanding on councils, communities
and central government alike.
So our support today is grounded in practicality.
We submit that the bill will only succeed if its
expectations are matched with clear roles,
workable governance, and realistic funding
and implementation pathways.
In our letter, which will be in your papers,
you'll have seen that we endorsed the Waikato Civil Defense
and Emergency Management Group submission,
and we've highlighted a small number of critical issues
that we think if addressed will materially strengthen the
bill and improve outcomes
for communities across New Zealand.
So we're seeking a little bit of re refinement,
certainly not redirection, so that the system works well.
In fact, the best it can when it matters most.
Let me just emphasize very quickly the
key themes about submission.
The first is, as I've mentioned,
that we support the direction, uh,
and particularly strengthening deliverability of the system.
This is a necessary and positive reform,
but we're go urging targeted amendments
to avoid unfunded mandates
and unclear accountability, particularly for councils.
The second is related to funding and capability.
'cause these are the critical risk as it's written,
new statutory duties are being introduced without new
funding mechanisms,
and we do need to stress
that councils are already operating under rates constraints
and cannot absorb these costs, especially
as we will move over the next few years into the full rates
capping environment.
The other is that staged implementation aligned
with council's long-term plan cycles is essential for this
to work best third point to stress is
that clear operational authority matters in emergencies.
Emergency powers must sit clearly with controllers, not
with governance committees.
We really urge that point to be absorbed.
Ambiguity around roles, warnings
and appointments, risks, command confusion
during real events when timing is critical
and has to be clear communication and leadership.
The fourth is we do want to emphasize the, the significance
and importance of Maori participation
to match expectations with support.
We are strongly, uh, supportive of strengthened iwi
and Maori involvement as anticipated in this bill.
In regions such as ours, the Waikato obligations are complex
and resource intensive.
So the bill must be supported by Nat National Guidance,
funding and realistic timeframes.
A simple model for this is highly desirable
and allied to this community led preparedness
needing recognition.
Community response groups, which include Mariah, who really,
uh, play such a pivotal role often on the ground in local
emergencies, are absolutely critical to our readiness.
So we urge that the bill explicitly recognizes
and supports community led planning,
not just rely on informal arrangements,
which is often the case.
Uh, we think it needs
to be much more formal and structured than that.
The fi final point that I'm going to mention
before I pass on to Emma and Kelvin for further comment
and to take your tough questions is that
stronger infrastructure resilience is supported, but roles
and interfaces need clarification and recovery
and welfare cost sharing gaps must be addressed.
The current reimbursement settings,
risk undermining partnership and trust.
I'm sorry, I've been going so fast,
but I know that your time is of the essence.
So I'll pass over to Emma and Kelvin at this point. Thank
You. Thank you, mayor Tim.
Um, firstly I just wanted
to thank the committee for extending the deadline,
um, for the submissions.
Um, that day that we received the extension,
the joint committee had read a letter to, um, to support
that, that extension as, uh, we had trouble
reaching other regions who were in state of emergency.
So, um, thank, thank you all for allowing that
and allowing meaningful input into this further
to Mayor Tim's, uh, key points.
I just wanted to add some extra weight to some of his,
um, speaking points.
Uh, we know that c DM budgets are separate
and distinct from local authorities currently,
and the proposed rates capping would have a significant
impact on C DM as a priority, um,
because it doesn't always rise to the top in the long list
of responsibilities and council's long-term plans.
So we are seeking clarity on the ability
to fund preparedness
and especially that long-term resilience
and not just in response and recovery.
We strongly support the increased, uh, Maori participation
and re and resourcing needs around this.
Um, we know that from Gabriel, uh, Auckland anniversary and,
and the events, um, in recent weeks that our iwi,
hapu and RAI a key in responding.
And that early engagement is crucial.
It becomes a real barrier for, um, c staff, um,
and council staff toengage, um,
when they're already strained with a lot of workload
to be able to create meaningful relationships, uh,
without simple pathways of how it's funded.
And we believe that these need to be nationally guided
with dedicated resources.
Um, and just lastly, I wanted
to endorse the previous speaker of the
OTA Otago Waste Network on making waste management
and essential infrastructure.
Uh, previously life blind utilities.
Uh, effective waste management is essential in protecting
public safety and health and recovery efforts
and needs to be integrated into emergency planning.
Um, yeah, and I just wanna thank the members for,
for their time today and,
and we're happy to take any questions.
Thank you so much and thanks again
for your detailed submission.
I just had a, uh, quick question.
I just noted in your written submission
that you were really opposed to the change of name to um,
committee because of its connections with local government,
and I just wanted, um,
because it's, it seems like something
that you felt strongly
about if you wanted to comment on that.
Emma, Emma will answer that. Thanks Madam Chair. Oh, no,
Kel, sorry.
Thank you again for the opportunity to, to be here today
and, and make some submissions.
I think for us at the operational level, we,
we needed some clarity
and committee has a different connotation to it.
It's, it's a, you know, emergency management through some
of this is quite directional in terms of what you're trying
to do and get clarity of messaging
and directions that are given as opposed
to a committee which, which has connotations of we all sit
around and we agree an outcome, which is not the way
that we can deal with
emergency management in the here and now.
Okay. That, that's really clear.
Thank you so much for that.
We have, um, run out of time now,
but thank you so much for joining us
and we really appreciate the way that you've engaged with
that and I'm really happy that you're able to contribute
with the, um, extended time as well.
So thanks for your comments on that too.
We're Very grateful. Thank you.
Thank you so much. Thank you. Take care.
Alright, I think we have our next submitter with us already,
uh, who is Summer Wright
and she's submitting on behalf of t
New Zealand Climate and Health Council.
So we'll just invite summer to join the panel.
Welcome summer, I think we have you there
and welcome, welcome to committee.
We've got your, um, copy of your submission
and we've got 10 minutes to hear from you. So over to you.
Uh, thank you panel for the opportunity to speak. I'm Dr.
Sam Maier Wright.
I'm a public health researcher,
and today I am speaking as the convener
of Auditor Tile Al New Zealand Climate and Health Council.
So Auditor Tile represents a thousand health workers, um,
which makes us the biggest health
and climate focused organization in Alor.
And this bill is of interest to us, um,
because we know that emergencies health
and climate are going increasingly hand in hand.
So today we want to just give you a brief health
and climate focused perspective.
Um, and so we acknowledge the bill
and tends to improve response to emergencies.
Um, some of which are already worsening in frequency
and severity, many of which are driven by climate change
as we've recently seen.
And communities in their health are resilient,
but only to a point, especially when climate change demands
are constantly mounting adaptation.
And the bill goes somewhere.
In recognizing this, we really like
that public health is acknowledged as an essential service
and that the bill aims to strengthen the role
of communities in Maori in emergency management.
However, I'll just raise two major issues today.
Um, the first issue we have is that health needs
to be better considered in the bill,
and the second is that the bill is in some ways not
consistent with Titi
or major international conventions related
to emergency management and health.
And so in raising these issues
and with the time, I'm just taking a pretty big picture
approach and it's good you've got our Richard submission
there for any more detail.
So to issue one, um, which is that health needs
to be better addressed in the bill.
Um, first the bill needs to explicitly state in its purposes
that it exists to protect health
and human rights, not just property.
And this would match the bill's later assertion
that public health is an essential service.
Second, we've all seen stories of Mara
and health providers being really pivotal in protecting
community health and emergencies.
And so then the bill needs
to recognize Mara Maori health providers,
community health providers
and organizations as essential service delivery partners
and essential infrastructure,
and then resource them accordingly.
And resourcing not only during emergencies,
but in in anticipation
and preparation for future emergencies.
Third, um, to better address health, the build needs
to better define disproportionately affect groups
to recognize how different groups can be more likely
to suffer threats to their health and emergencies.
And so then the definition should be amended
to include Maori and recognition of a wealth of evidence
that states Maori face unique
and exacerbated health impacts in and beyond, in
and beyond emergencies, especially weather related ones.
Um, and the definition should also include disabled people,
recent migrants and migrant workers among others
as you've likely heard today.
Um, and so then the second issue I'll raise is the bill
should be more consistent with TE
and in international conventions as well as
with recommendations of the formal inquiry into the response
to North Island severe weather events.
So first to te um, despite Titi being a source
of rights for all New Zealanders, including rights to health
and to be protected from
and during emergencies, TEI is not mentioned in the bill.
Um, and so we think a good start there is to incorporate
and address articles of tei.
Uh, any powers granted to actors also need to be consistent
with TE and not override it.
Uh, for example, course 1 25 should specify
that these powers should be exercised with regard
to the needs of disproportionately affected communities
and treaty obligations.
In part three of the bill, which sets out the framework
for emergency management system planning, um, the bill needs
to ensure that Tua are involved in the
development of the strategy.
So the bill says it will engage in seeking advice
and development, but it should go a bit further
and say it, it should explicitly provide
for active protection of
and shared decision making with Maori.
Then in section 39, we support the inclusion
of Maori in emergency coordinating groups.
But as it reads, this isn't explicit.
Um, it says it should involve someone with perspectives
of Maori, but sounds like that could be anyone.
So it should be explicitly about ua, local Hapu Iwi as well
as, um, including Maori health providers
alongside other health providers.
Then, um, in terms of international standards, uh,
the bill should be better aligned to the Sendai framework
for disaster risk reduction.
Um, and so for example, in that framework, um, says
that the primary responsibility is of the state to prevent
and reduce disaster risk,
but this isn't quite reflected in the bill.
So in course 80, um, we think that it should be amended
to place primary responsibility
of ensuring community wellbeing on the state,
not just on individuals and communities.
And so the inquiry I mentioned
before already said that local governments
and communities are strained by the expectation
that emergencies are their responsibility,
and we think responsibility needs to be elevated
to the national level and reflected in the bill.
Doing this would then align the bill
to really baseline international standards set
by the Sendai framework.
Then lastly, again, in terms of that North Island inquiry,
um, it said that a preventive approach
to emergencies is needed.
And so in the view of audit tile,
a preventive approach also includes reducing emissions
and resourcing the health sector.
And so the bill should
and could be better linked to our wider climate response
and to protection improvement
of the health system across its whole content.
So in summary, we think health needs
to be better addressed in the bill,
and the bill needs to be consistent
with really fundamental domestic
and international conventions.
Otherwise it won't deliver on its promise
to protect us in emergencies.
Kilda
Kilda, thank you so much for that, um, submission, uh,
summer, uh, I'll just check
with members if they've got any, uh, questions.
Uh, I had one which was, we had some
submitters also raise concerns about, uh, the position
of iwi Maori within the bill.
And one of the suggestions was that there should be a kind
of national oversight, um,
rather than just having the individual key committees,
uh, operate separately.
Is that something that, that you, you
or your organization would support in terms of, you know,
looking at ways to practically strengthen that commitment?
Yeah, I think we've seen other organizations recommend
like a national platform for partnership between Maori, um,
for the development of strategies and plans
and we, we would support that.
Thank you. I've got a question from Francisco,
Uh, Kiata. Thank you
Chair. Thank you so much for your submission.
Um, one of the things we've heard from other, um, um,
or at least I've seen from other written submissions, um,
from other, uh, environmental, uh, NGOs is the need, um,
for the build to more tightly integrate like climate
adaptation, um, stuff.
But um, is that something you guys would support as well?
Yeah, absolutely.
I didn't quite get too, um, much detail of that.
But I think linking, if we know that
emergencies like those related
to severe weather are massively contributed to
by a changing climate, then climate change
and climate climate adaptation think really need
to be strongly present in this bill.
Um, and so yeah, I would agree with that suggestion.
Francisco. Thank you.
Okay, thank you. Thank you.
Uh, I don't think we've got any, uh,
further questions at this stage, so thank you so much again,
uh, for joining us and
for your participation today in your written
submission. We appreciate it. Cool.
Thanks for having us. Cookie tea.
Cookie tea. Um, members, we just, uh,
running a little bit early, uh, so we might just, uh,
I think our next submit is not due until, um, two 40,
so we might just, um, suspend until two 40
and just hopefully we will have a submitter
ready, um, at that point.
Thank you.
Thanks everyone. I understand we have, um,
volunteering New Zealand, um, who have kindly agreed
to do their submission a little bit early.
Um, so I'll just see if we can get them to join.
I think we've got Glenda there.
Thanks. Fantastic.
Glenda, we can see you, you, you're still on mute, but um,
if you can unmute.
Okay, perfect. I think we can hear you now and see you.
Thank you so much for joining us, um, a little bit early.
We have received a copy of your written submission
and we've got, uh, 10 minutes
to hear from you today. So, uh, over to you.
So I was gonna be following on from volunteer
New Zealand, so
Oh, okay. Um,
So hopefully, um, Michelle is not for
Away. Okay.
So are we, are we, we, I'll just check with our staff.
We might need to just, um, suspend until two 50.
If we don't have everyone from your organization here,
We can follow up with Michelle if that would take
Helpful. Okay. So I,
I just suggest, um, Glenda, if you prefer
to join with Michelle, then we'll just suspend until, um,
your original time of two 50 and then we That's fine.
We'll start. But thank you so much for being available.
No problem. Sorry you soon. We'll see you back at two 50.
Thanks so much. Cool. Thank you. Thank you.
Check with committee staff that we have everyone present
for volunteering New Zealand. Yep.
We'll just bring them through now.
Fantastic. Thank you.
Welcome, welcome.
Glenda and Michelle, thank you so much for joining us.
Uh, we really appreciate it.
Uh, we've got a copy of your written submission
and we've got 10 minutes to hear from you this afternoon.
Over to you.
Thank you, uh, very much.
Um, thank you for the opportunity to, uh,
speak today in support of our written submission.
Uh, just before I start, I'd just like to, um, note,
um, a couple of key points.
Um, our submission referenced a, um, support
for an anticipated volunteer center network, al
or collective submission.
This wasn't actually submitted in the
end, so just noting that.
And you've noted. Um, I'm joined by Glenda Martin.
She's, um, a board member of volunteering New Zealand
and also general manager of Volunteering Canterbury.
Volunteering New Zealand is the National Peak Body
for volunteers and volunteering within a hundred national
members, including the 17 regional volunteer centers,
collectively connecting
with 10,000 community organizations across that network.
We maintain a neutral role supporting both volunteers
and the organizations that engage them
with a strong focus on sector capability building from a
national to grassroots level.
Um, we've got members active across the emergency management
system, as well as lots of other domains.
Um, and,
but we have experience in supporting members responding to,
particularly to the anniversary of floods
and also Cycl Cyclone Gabriel,
and our own, um,
national sector leadership in COVID national emergency.
You know, so there's a range of things we're drawing on.
We support the bill, um, particularly, uh, the reframing,
the strength and recognition
and integration of, uh, uh, iwi Maori and communities,
and the focus on ensuring actors have the tools
that they need across the system.
Uh, I guess a key message from our perspective is
that volunteers, um,
and communities underpin the shared emergency response
and recovery capability of New Zealand.
Uh, the contribution is essential and natural,
and as emergencies increase in frequency
and recovery periods, lengthen
and overlap, we really need
to make sure this ecosystem is properly valued,
supported, and sustained.
Uh, so in terms of
resourcing communities and volunteer capability, um,
and capacity, um, we know that community organizations
shoulder disproportionate recovery responsibilities long
after the formal responses have ended.
And resourcing and peace time is essential
because these, um, and organizations
and communities can't, it's not feasible for any of us
to scale up after an emergency.
So we really, um, think it's important to resource
and, uh, enable upfront.
Um, so we also think that, um,
you know, volunteers are everywhere, um,
across readiness, response and recovery.
We, we've noted in our bill, uh, in our submission, uh,
that, um, the bill doesn't currently differentiate,
differentiate the different volunteer types, um,
and that differentiation, um,
of the different volunteer types could support appropriate
planning and safe mobilization.
Um, uh, we also keen to see,
um, and recommend including volunteer voices at NASH
and organizations that support
or work with volunteers at national, regional, local levels.
Um, things that are coming through in the bill.
Um, and we want to, um, you know,
this may reduce barriers and enhance, enhance engagements
and potentially support that into the
extended recovery periods.
Um, you've already heard today from one
of the vol regional volunteer centers, we know, you know,
across, uh, emergency
and beyond, uh, volunteer coordination, recruitment
and deployment are central
to readiness, response and recovery.
Um, the regional volunteer center network plays a critical
role in enabling volunteer mobilization
on a day-to-day basis.
Um, you've already heard that in the,
in communities doing this,
and, um, they're already, uh, I think the capacity to scale
during a, um, an emergency is limited without
sustainable ongoing funding.
We recommend consistent annual investment
to ensure volunteer infrastructure is prepared
and are not just funded reactively during events.
Really wanna shout out
and highlight, um, that volunteer Bay
of Plenty's contribution during the mountain long annu
and welcome base storm events recently, really high lucks.
What good looks like in, in this space.
Um, some of the, you know, the strengths of the, uh,
response capability included a, a dedicated system
for volunteer coordination during emergencies.
Um, a standby group enabled
of a hundred vetted volunteers supporting
local regional councils.
Um, their platform enabled volunteers to register viewer,
um, opportunities and self-assigned tasks.
Uh, and most of this was enabled by preparatory work
and infrastructure, um, enabling them to operate
and do this once an event occurred.
So, from my point of view, uh, the resil,
you know, the resilience
of our emergency management system depends
on resilient communities.
Um, to achieve this, we think the bill
and the policy settings around it must embed
and resource the volunteering community infrastructure
that already carries much of our tier's, emergency response
and recovery workload.
Um, I would like to, um, hand over to, um, Linda to share.
She has some reflections to share as well on our submission.
Hopefully we've lost some time for questions.
Yeah, yeah, we've got, we've got plenty of time.
Oh. So, uh, I just wanted to, uh, thank you again
for the opportunity, um,
and wanted to talk more specifically about that
spontaneous volunteer group, uh, in terms
of the emergency response.
So the spontaneous volunteers, uh, members of the community
who may not have a particular affiliation to one group
or another, uh, but that won't be diminishing their desire
or ability to actually assist during an emergency.
Managing those volunteers is essential
to ensure the right support is offered from the right
place at the right time.
Gaps in communications were noted in reporting following
Cyclone Gabrielle, uh,
and lessons, uh, learned
pre emergency preparation ensure greater capacity,
as Michelle has mentioned around the
spontaneous volunteer management
and their participation
during recent weather events in the Bay of Plenty.
For example, preparation enables communication,
which identifies appropriate skilled volunteers
who could be available during an event.
Each month over 54, 50 4% of New Zealanders volunteer.
And to some extent, there is an expectation
that they can just get on out there and do it,
and an emergency situation
that's not necessarily appropriate.
During COVID, we learned
that good communication works when people understood that
by simply staying at home was the best thing
to do at the time they did.
Being prepared requires planning
and communication systems in place so
that clear messaging is available to those
who put up their hand to volunteer spontaneously.
That message, we value you,
but we may not need you till later.
Creates a feeling of being heard
and also assures us that we've got, uh, people
who are will stay ready, allowing our first responders
to be in and moving swiftly.
And the pool of people across the community is on hold,
ready to be, uh, put in place, especially
around the inevitable long recovery period
that follows any emergency event.
Volunteer in Canterbury was established in 1988.
We've got re relationships across the community supporting
both a diverse range of volunteer engage
and community organizations,
which give annually just under 1 million hours across wa
taha, together with providing local business teams
who may not otherwise have time to give back
to those same communities.
So we're connected into, uh, a, a wide range
of people already volunteering
and already having some experience
and reach like other volunteer centers.
As you heard from Volunteer Central,
this morning is wide and it is ready.
Emergency response though in ADD is in addition
to our business as usual,
and resourcing to enable pre emergency planning is critical
if we're able to appropriately
and safely engage the large pool of people
who we do have access to
and who we know are ready to respond.
Thank you.
Thank you. We just have, um, I think one minute left.
I just had a question around training.
Do you think that if, um, the government was able,
or local government was able to provide, uh,
additional training that there'd be an appetite for that
for volunteers training and emergency management?
Yes. I, I do think there would be,
and I think that that, um, is something that
we would be able to promote widely across, uh,
the volunteers that are already working in
other organizations.
So, for example, when an emergency flips in likes of, uh,
COVID is a good example, a lot of people
who are already volunteering weren't able
to then continue volunteering,
so they immediately become available.
And those people are often, uh, people
who have a certain amount of a training already
and the roles that they're already in
quite ready to step up.
Uh, and I think that would just give us a, an that,
an an extra layer of people who are ready to roll as opposed
to people who are ready to roll,
but without, uh, the, the training.
Uh, I, yeah, I think that's just something
that we would just naturally add in as an, uh, as an opt-in
for people who wanted to upskill.
Thank you so much. Thank
you for all the work that you do as well.
Um, a huge effort, effort that goes into, um,
volunteering around New Zealand.
So we really, uh, appreciate, um, you joining us today
and also the work you do in your everyday life as well.
Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you very much. And thank you
for the work that you do as well.
Thank you Much ya,
Yahi, thank you members.
We, uh, now have a, um, plan suspension until, uh,
3:15 PM So I'll see you back, uh, here then.
And maybe if you could just, um, just ask the staff
to just update the time on the, um, chat, just
so everyone's aware of the time.
Thanks.
Oh, fantastic. Looks like we've got our next submitter here.
Uh, Jillian, welcome to the committee.
We've got a copy of your written submission.
Are you waiting for anyone to join you?
No, sorry, that looks like
there's someone joining me, but no.
Oh, okay. Uh, we've got,
thank you so much for your written submission.
We've got a copy of that
and we've got 10 minutes to hear from you today.
So over to you
Jra. Thank you very much for
the opportunity to speak.
Um, I just wanted to make a couple of,
uh, very brief comments.
Um, under the bill, anybody who provides water wastewater
or stormwater services is, um,
an essential infrastructure provider.
Um, obviously around the country, depending on
what the situation is, uh,
many people are providing those emergency services response,
and I just want to acknowledge their efforts, um,
under local water done well, which is the water reform
that has, um, gone through in this house.
Um, in this term of parliament, you get two different types
of water service providers.
You get in-house business units within councils that
where the water services needs to be ring fenced from other,
uh, council activities,
and then you get water service organizations, CCOs,
which can be either a single or a multi.
Um, one of the things that comes across in the bill is
that there are different obligations depending on whether
you are one or the other.
Um, from our perspective, the principles should be
that the water services related emergency man management
landscape should be the same regardless
of whether you are an in-house provider or a CCO.
So we just want to, we,
what we've made submissions to that effect.
And then there was just one other piece I was just keen to,
to raise it is that, um, there is a need to be clear about,
um, when there is a sector response required of
where the responsibility for that, um, exists.
Um, water New Zealand joined the cyclone, Gabriel stepped in
to help coordinate the water sector response,
but as an industry body, we're not mandated,
we're not resourced, we're not funded.
Now, if there is a decision that's made
that it is appropriate that a body like ours does have
that function, then one needs to address how one's look at
how one's going to, to, to, um, resource it
and, um, and fund it.
But under the, under the, um,
water Services Authority legislation that has set up
to matter, ROI, they have a role in drinking water
emergencies where they've got some funding.
They don't have a role in terms of,
and certainly no funding.
Um, I think there may be try, uh,
there might be a greater role than it used to be in relation
to wastewater and stormwater.
And I think the critical piece is to make sure
that we know a, who has responsibility, um,
and that the funding is there to ensure
that the response is appropriate.
Because as we all know, pre-planning is a far better, um,
way of approaching emergencies than
to be doing it in real time.
Happy to take questions.
Thank you so much for that.
Um, I, I suppose I'm not an expert on the,
either the former proposal in relation to water
or the future proposal,
but do you, do you see that this particular bill will,
if that if the, um, local water done well,
proposals are implemented, that there are any challenges
that are, will be different than under the current, um,
current regime?
So, so the, the legislation
that put in place in local water done well, um,
policies has been implemented.
So what we have at the moment is, you know, just
as an example in, um, in, uh, in the Hamilton Waikato area,
you've got Hamilton City Council coming together
with the Waikato to create
The y Sorry, my question was more
with the new legislation, given that, um, the,
since we last looked at this legislation,
we have had local water done, well implemented.
Whether there's any additional challenges,
and obviously, um, one that you've raised is the consistency
between the, um, CCOs in terms of the treatment.
But is there anything else that, that you, you can see
that interaction of the, of the relatively new system
and this proposed new bill?
I think the real question is, is is around what,
what does it mean to be ring-fenced
as a in-house business unit?
You know, in terms of if you, if you are going to be used
by the council to provide emergency
services, what does that mean?
Um, particularly if, if the people
who have been Sims trained happen
to be within the water team,
but it's not necessarily a water a related issue,
they'll get borrowed by council and how does that work
and how do you make sure that in the, in the same,
that you are funded appropriately
because it's not there in terms of the long-term, um, plan
and the planning, um, and funding that, that occurs.
And so we just need to make sure that those sorts
of things are done appropriately, um, so
that we can all respond
and be funded to be able to do that in,
in a, in a sensible way.
Yeah. Thank you. And I, I just noted
that another point in your submission was that, you know,
previously you have provided that overall, um, uh, support.
And what if, if that was to be recognized in terms
of funding, what, how would you say that?
What would, how would that look within this bill?
So I think one of the pieces that needs
to be clear in terms of like the sector response plans,
you know, is are there roles,
and I note that in terms of some of the other speakers, uh,
in this session are sector, um, coordination entities.
Um, I think the telecommunications forum is, I know
that transfer is in terms of the altruistic sector,
and it's just about recognizing what that is, such
that when there is engagement with, you know,
essential infrastructure providers, that it's understood,
you know, that, that you are,
when you are asking a question, if, for example, there is a,
a, um, you know, there's a fire in a region
and you are asking about whether that fire is going
to get close to the drinking water facilities, you know,
that you are, that there is, it's understood
that you are asking appropriate questions
and that you're not hindering, um, um, the
Fantastic. Yeah,
that's, that's great. Thank you so much.
I don't think I've got any questions from any other
members, um, Jillian.
So unless there was any, um, kind
of closing comments you wanted to make,
Um, look for your time.
Um, you know, I think it's, um, just thank you
for the opportunity to, to,
to speak on behalf of the water sector.
Certainly it's really important that the water sector as a,
an essential infrastructure provider is involved in,
in the development of, of emergency management, particularly
as we go down outta the legislation into the implementation
of sector response plans and, um, uh, and,
and other pieces, um, you know,
whether it's national or regional level.
So thank you so much. Thank, I definitely raised that, um,
CCO point, um, with consistency with officials, um,
after the missions are finished as well.
So thank you so much for raising that with us. Thank you.
Thank you Kia. Kia.
And I do believe we've got our next submitter, Dennis,
uh, joining us.
Dennis, welcome to the committee.
See if we can, um, get you either unmuted
or your video turned on if you wish.
I think we should be able to hear you now.
Okay. Can you hear me?
Yes. Thank you, Dennis. Thank you.
We've, we've got your submission
and we've only got five minutes with you as an individual,
so I won't waste any more time.
I'll hand over to you. Thanks. Thank
You. Well, ki and
thank for the opportunity.
My name is Dennis Teg.
I practice Lauren Thas for 45 years
and serve my district on the Y Katter Regional Council.
Thas is a classic case study in maladaptation.
The town faces a fivefold threat, extreme present day,
coastal and river flooding, sinking land, rising groundwater
and debris flows.
So I'm here because this bill is my opinion, reactive
while my community is running out of time.
And while the bill has where the objectives remains trapped
in a cleaning up mindset
by prioritizing a legislative program
of disaster reaction logistics over adaptation,
we are reinforcing an obsolete, uh, obsolete disaster
by disaster cycle.
And the risk reduction pillar in the bill is hollow.
Without a statutory link
to a comprehensive national adaptation framework,
we cannot manage emergencies effectively while ignoring
the land use laws that create them.
I've also out outlined while
reacting is also a fiscal failure,
and the two, um, 2 25 South Dunedin study
suggests relocation may well have a higher benefit
to cost ratio than hard engineering, especially
as private insurers retreat
and climate change destroys stock banks
and sea wall walls decades earlier than projected.
So I'd like to focus on a, on the case study,
and I think it's a textbook example
of a small council overwhelmed by climate reality.
In 2022, they locked in a sea wall option using,
in my opinion, cherry picked data
and without considering river flooding, four years later,
a fluvial flood study study
threw the sea wall option into disarray.
The sea wall doesn't protect us, it acts
as a dam creating a bathtub effect that worsens the threat
to life and property and no amount of pumping will cope.
And meanwhile, the non threat of rising groundwater, pushing
flooding under the wall was
explicitly excluded from the study.
Satellite data shows our foreshore is sinking up
to five times faster than council wall design estimates
tripling the local sea level rise rate,
and council ignored a debris flow risk comparable to the
disaster, which would trap lethal boulderer debris
behind the very war meant to save us.
So what this adds up to is small councils are often
too close to local property politics to make the hard calls,
and in my opinion, abandoning regional
councils will compound this.
So the priority must shift
to providing the legislative teeth
and funding to stop building unsafe defenses in areas
of intolerable risk like thas
and start moving people out of harm's way.
So thank you. I'm happy to answer any questions.
Thank you so much for your, um, submission, Dennis, just
of taking, um, your view
and your submission that it,
that it is a little bit reactive, the bill.
Um, what would be like the key thing that you would see
as the bill that is currently structured
that we could change, um, that would help, um, mitigate some
or alleviate some of those concerns that you have?
Well, in itself, it won't, it won't, um,
cover the issues I'm talking about,
but it would, it would have to, I think it needs
to effectively link to those bills, which have been sort of
kick down the, the can a can down the
road, which is a shame.
I think the priority should have been those other bills,
frankly, rather than this
because whilst this, you know, has worthy objectives,
I don't think it's gonna make a huge difference to,
you know, people on the ground and,
and how they're affected by climate change.
So I think there has to be better integration.
Thank you, Dennis. Yeah, I think that that's, um,
I can see one of my colleagues nodding there
and that's certainly a point that's been made
that we'll raise with, um,
with officials after this as well.
But we have run out of time with you, so thank you so much
for, um, you know, your work in the past
and also, um, submitting and writing to the committee
and, and being with us here today. We really appreciate it.
Thanks for chance. Thank you.
Thank you so much. Thank you.
I think we have our next submitters here,
which is the Student Volunteer Army.
We've got Sam there.
Hi Sam, welcome to the committee.
Good afternoon, Camilla and Melissa.
Uh, great to be here. Thank you for having us.
No worries. Um, thank you for being with us
and thanks for your written submission.
We've, um, received a copy of that
and had a look through it, and we've got 10 minutes
to hear from you, uh, today.
So, uh, just wanted to, um, hand over to you
and also acknowledge, um, this 15 year milestone as well
with your, um, organization.
So I'm sure you can speak to that in your submission.
And I see you've got some colleagues joining as well.
So, uh, just up to you who, um,
who speaks and uses that time. Sure.
Thank you very much, um, Jefferson, um,
Camilla for having us.
Uh, yes, as you, as you mentioned, uh, today is the, uh,
actually anniversary of the start of student volunteer army
for the February earthquake.
So 15 years ago, uh, today is when our, um,
major mobilization actually happened.
So it's a, it's a, um, it's a poignant moment
and it's a great privilege to present on this, uh,
very important topic to student volunteer Army.
Uh, to the committee, uh, my name's Sam Johnson.
I'm the founder and chair of Student Volunteer Army,
and there are three of us here from Student Army today.
We will speak for about five minutes
and then welcome your questions.
Um, my colleague Kim will speak next,
and our, um, student president from, um, uh,
Victoria University can, uh, Dixon will speak after that.
Uh, student volunteer Army now is the largest youth-led
emergency management network in the country.
We have members at 40% of New Zealand schools
who we recognize and help identify as volunteers.
Uh, throughout the year, which we've been doing
for over five years, uh, we have 16,000,
uh, um, 500 members, um, who are active
and a database of over 50,000 people overall.
Uh, our 2026 to 2030 strategy building, a new generation
of volunteers has a single purpose,
and that's to build a generation who are ready to step up
and help their communities when a disaster
strikes of any type.
Uh, we started this strategy as we knew that
that actually the number of disasters would, will outstrip,
uh, the number, the ability of, of an institution,
any institution to respond to that.
So our intention is to build the volunteer capacity
and help people identify as a volunteer and show up.
In the last eight months of, uh, of last year,
we mobilized 400 volunteers, um, uh, across a range
of different responses,
and particularly in Nelson, uh, in Ma Waker this year.
And just last weekend, we had volunteers clearing properties
in, in banks peninsula, um, uh, and in wa wa Waikato
and Volunteers did the same at Wahe Beach.
Look, we, we fundamentally support the intent of the bill,
but as we've see in our submission, we think it has a major
and critical flaw.
It assumes that volunteer capacity exists
and it will continue existing
without the emergency management sector
or the government investing in volunteering.
As a small side, we have more funding support from the
Australian government on an annual basis
for our programs in South Australia
and Tasmania than we get from New Zealand.
And we do get funding from New Zealand government
for volunteer preparedness.
It comes from a youth development budget
or sort of strange little side pocket rather than anything
from emergency management readiness, funding expense,
reimbursement for volunteers, coordination
and pathways into paid careers, uh, in emergency management,
we believe are structural gaps.
Um, and not just an operational detail
that can be picked up after a disaster.
The government inquiry confirmed the system externalizes
these costs onto volunteers, uh,
and basically the council does everything,
is worried about everything up to the gate
of a person's home and not beyond that.
So long as they're alive, that's fine,
and we won't do anything else.
Uh, but we go in and, and, and help clean up again
and again and again.
Uh, the model is unsustainable and,
and we will not be here in 15 years to, to, to be able
to continue doing this without a change.
The bill says whole society, uh, but only funds, councils.
Uh, it doesn't fund civil society.
It doesn't have any mechanisms to fund civil society.
It certainly doesn't support
or have any intention
around volunteer involving organizations
or individual volunteers.
The digger driver in ua who, who, who, um, would, would,
would do so much work as a
volunteer if we could pay his fuel.
There's actually no mechanism to be able to pay his fuel
and reimburse him to do a whole lot of work
that he could otherwise do.
Similarly for Marai.
So we asked three things, uh, one to support our amendments,
um, uh, and two advocate, um, for the role of, um,
of volunteers, uh,
and volunteering across the multiple agencies
and ministries that, that are involved in, um,
in emergency management.
Um, uh, and yeah, champion, I guess a cross party agreement
to formally invest in volunteer preparedness for disasters.
Um, thank you. And I'll hand over to my colleague Kim, um,
and who I acknowledged do, did a lot of the legwork, uh,
on preparing our submission.
Kim, thank you.
Um, thank you very much for the opportunity to speak.
Um, I'm Kim Amani Bagley, a board member,
and as Sam said, I did most
of the legal drafting for our submission.
I've got a law degree from Canterbury
and I've also tutored in public law
and lectured in human rights law.
For the last 20 years.
I've advised ministers
and government agencies on outcomes for Maori
and communities at risk of disadvantage
as principal advisor COVID on COVID-19
for the Ministry of Pacific Peoples.
And also for Nima.
I saw firsthand a critical role that SVA played now all
of government response, providing surge capacity
and trusted reach into communities, households
and workforces, including the New Zealand police that know
of the mechanism could.
The bill speaks to a whole society approach,
but does not provide the framework
for investment to make that real.
In our submission, we
provided 13 amendments to the bill To address this
and more, we ask you to formally recognize volunteering
and organize volunteering emergency responses
as a core pillar of emergency management.
We would like to see le a legislative framework
for three interlocking funding, mechanism readiness, funding
expense reimbursement, and dedicated volunteer coordination.
We would also like the bill to recognize there needs
to be a structured volunteer program pathway
and to paid emergency management careers.
We provide specific drafting to assist the committee.
And thank you. I will now pass it on to Cam,
who hopefully is on the line,
Uh, Koto to the committee.
I'm Cam, I'm the Vic, SVA club president here at, uh, Teka.
Uh, I support SVA and I'm very involved in this COPA
because community resilience
and building a culture of volunteerism are incredibly
important to our country's success and our,
and our safety going forward.
Um, this bill directly affects ran Tahi
and my generation, uh,
because we are the people who will respond
to New Zealand's emergencies for the next 50 years.
I've seen what happens when young people are recognized
as volunteers, and when they're given the tools
to help, uh, they show up.
Uh, they don't show up once they continue showing up
and they, they support others to keep doing.
So when a high school student led, uh, 40 volunteers
to respond after the,
the huge storm in Inver cargo last
October, that wasn't luck.
That was the SVA supporting
and investing in our, in our volunteers.
And that was that paying off.
Uh, right now we do this despite the way the system is
structured, uh, not because of it.
There's no funding, there's no reimbursement,
and there's no formal recognition that
what we do is system critical.
Uh, we're asking you to change that,
recognize us in legislation, uh, in this bill
from the coordination that makes our goodwill count
and we want to be ready.
Uh, but legislation needs to be too. Thank you very much.
And I'll pass back to Sam.
Thanks so much, Kim and Kim.
Uh, so just in closing, we, we've built a network of 50,000,
uh, volunteers who are part of SVA
'cause we know that actually the number of disasters, uh,
will continue increasing
and that we, uh, want to be able to show up and help.
Um, we ask you to support our amendments.
We, um, ask you to value volunteering.
And I think above it, above all else,
it's just putting volunteering as a major pillar,
uh, in this bill.
Uh, thank you very much for the time
and happy to take some questions.
Thank you so much. Uh, thanks to all three of you.
And we do have some time for questions, um,
and just wanting to acknowledge the incredible amount
of work over the last 15 years, um, that you've done.
And also, Kim, you are, um, excellent, uh,
very detailed submissions in terms
of amendments that we can make.
So that's, um, you know, very much
appreciated and acknowledged.
We've got a question from, um, Francisco.
Uh, thank you Chair. Thank you so much
for the mahi doing again, for how comprehensive the, um,
submissions and amendments have been.
Um, my question is around the national reimbursement, um,
mechanism you proposed.
Are you, are you kind of thinking, uh, a 100, a 100%
reimbursement, or are you looking for like partial cover?
I I, I think this, the specific design of it could be in,
uh, a range of ways.
And it depends, and it has to be thresholds,
but effectively you've got a decision on two fronts.
Is one, can we afford as a country to pay everyone wages
to do the number of disaster responses
required in the next 10 years?
Or do you want to rely on volunteers?
If you rely on volunteers, you have
to realize it's a very small amount of money
that can motivate someone to do a very large amount of work.
And that nothing, there's nothing wrong
with someone volunteering for weeks at a time to clean up,
um, or to help their community.
The key thing we need to do is better enable people
and make it possible for them to volunteer.
And sometimes that's as much as the $7 of fuel
that's required currently.
There's no way to be reimbursed for that
unless you have, uh,
a contractor arrangement with a council.
And even then you can't access to it
until the disaster's happened.
And then you've gotta set up the mechanism
and then get approved to go back to nema.
Basically, it does happen each time after a disaster.
But the, the administration is, is, is so great.
So the digger driver is one example.
Um, but the, the small amounts of funds to transfer, uh, to,
to help enable people or enable groups of any sort
and, um, including, uh, Mariah in community organizations,
uh, even schools, um, it, it makes a big difference.
Thank you Melissa Lee.
Thank you. And thank you for all that you do.
And I can't believe it's 15 years since
SCA was actually set up.
Gosh, you are all f uh, the question
that I had was that earlier, uh,
I think it was Volunteer New Zealand who actually said
that not all volunteers are the same,
and in an emergency, volunteers often need to, are not able
to actually participate in the emergency cleanup.
So in terms of the training for your volunteers,
what's actually involved
and what kind of work can they actually do?
I mean, I've seen some of the work that you've actually done
during the Christchurch quake. Yeah,
I, I think if you just look across the last three years in
the type of work that that we do, it's, it's,
it's always phy, it's often physical work.
Um, but it is, uh, a much, it's ontological security
of showing up and offering
to help, even if you do very little.
It's the conversation. It's the psychological support,
it's the sense of being there.
Um, we're seeing that be much more important, um, as well
as clearing rubble, or not rubble, but clearing, um, silt
or mud out of people's houses.
Um, I mean, AI insurance is now one of, um,
SVAs major partners.
And we, with them predict that areas where we are going
to have to respond on the next few years,
because we look at where houses have a flood risk
around the river, and you look at the likelihood of, uh,
of a flood event there
and then look, okay, most likely we're going to have to,
um, respond there.
And as insurance companies, um, uh, uh, globally, uh, choose
to take less risk in those places,
we've gotta think about our ability to step up.
Um, I mean, volunteering New Zealand is correct in that, in
that a lot of volunteering organizations can't suddenly
switch to a disaster response.
Um, we have about half of our
volunteer responders would sign up in the
moment for a volunteer.
Um, and we've got the right mechanisms
to integrate them with civil defense.
On the weekend, the civil defense from Canterbury contacted,
asked for volunteers from SVA, we sent the volunteers.
We helped the residents. That's great.
Um, uh, and Nelson at the end of last year,
I was shocked when civil defense was moving back into its
business as us as usual
because the roads are open and the bridges are fixed.
Uh, but actually we, we ended up working
for another six weeks cleaning up 110 people's homes
and garages and gardens, um, and, and,
and getting funded for that.
I mean, it's not, you can't get philanthropy for it,
and it's such important you can, but it's hard
and it's such important work.
Um, but it relies on literally kind of the same group
of us from years ago, motivating ourselves
to do it rather than being organized and,
and working with others such as land, um,
Landcare New Zealand, who we work with to be actually go,
no, look, these places are going to have disasters
and we should be able to respond
and help each other here, um, and, and, and,
and be, I guess, be able to show up in the right way.
Um, and that's the problem with the bill.
It really is dealing just
with the technical response on public areas,
but it wouldn't take much to value volunteerism as
as, um, as part of that.
Thank you. Thank you so much. Thank you.
Uh, thank you all so much for joining us, um, Sam Cameron
and Kim and, and for the work that you do.
We really appreciate it. Thank you.
Thank you. Thanks for your time. Lovely guys.
Yeah, thank you. Thank you.
We now have our next submitter, uh,
from the National Iwi Chairs Forum.
I think we've got Kitty Allen
there, just
Kda, KDA Kda.
Welcome to the Governance and Adminis
and Administration Committee.
Oh, qui, we've
Got qui, uh, we've got, uh, your written submission,
and we've got 10 minutes to hear from you,
so you know the drill. Over to you.
Cheers. Um, thanks Madam Chairman,
and to your, uh, colleagues as well, uh,
members of the committee.
Um, look, I'm not gonna go
through the substantive submission.
I think you've all we'll take that as read.
Um, but I just wanna make a couple of, I guess, uh,
ancillary remarks to be the, so to speak,
um, to the submission.
Um, first I just really wanna acknowledge as well that, um,
the most recent weather events, um, the victims, uh,
of those recent weather events, um, those
that are still currently displaced, um, as a consequence
of those recent weather events.
And I think just those events in isolation have
highlighted how the necessity
for emergency management reform.
So to that point, want to commend the Minister,
minister Mitchell for being the steward of this bill.
Um, and all the officials
that I know have been working very hard
to get the bill into the position that it is now,
the National Cheers Forum.
Um, we have structured in a way
where there are several priorities,
and one of those is climate change
and emergency management falls under that, um, that po
there's a reason for that
because the two are intimately connected.
Um, climate change is, is here, it's on our doorstep.
We're seeing recent severe weather events that, uh,
are once 100 year events occurring every single year
and are getting worse and worse.
So to that, to that point, um, we can't,
the, this bill cannot be colored, can't not be colored
by the other events that, uh,
and the other pieces of legislation
that need to go hand in hand.
This bill needs to sit in alignment with, uh,
the Resource Management Act and the reforms there,
and the national adaptation, um, plan as well,
that's been developed and framework that's been developed.
One of the failures that I see within this bill is
that we can't see the evidence
that there is that interconnection.
And in absence of that, there are gaps within the bill.
Our overarching position,
however, is that we support a number of the amendments
that have been made, and in particular, uh, to acknowledge
that Maori have never been embedded into the emergency
management legislative legislation prior.
Uh, and so this bill goes a long way to do that.
Uh, and it has included a range of different, uh, I guess
constituencies, um, and Maori have been a part of that.
But if we look at the role
that Maori have consistently played in emergencies,
we see time
and time again in almost every single, uh, report
that's been prepared, uh, in response
to a severe weather event, is that it has been Maori
that have opened up their doors to the marae, uh,
in times of need.
Uh, it has been Maori communities
that have hosted all members from every community house,
them cloth them, fed them.
Um, so that's in the immediate response.
And both the NSBE report and the Bush report,
and several other reports highlight the role
that Maori in particular have played.
Um, when we stretch over to recovery, um, again,
Maori have been at the forefront of leading recovery for URI
that often aren't seen and often aren't heard.
I wanna highlight the work that TGA Maki in particular,
and TE did as a consequence
of Cyclone Gabriel in the recovery phases advocated
for the lifting of NSBE dip, which is a dip in the road
that, um, that basically, um,
it meant that entire communities were isolated for severe,
uh, for prolonged periods of time.
And as a consequence, they had those road, uh,
that road lifted, they uplifted onto stilts over 60 homes.
Um, so I think often Maori kind of put into this category
where it's just in response that they do this great work,
but actually it's across all four Rs.
And so one of the things that we have recommended as a part
of the, um, the, the proposed amendments, is
that there is a te clause
that is embedded into the emergency ma management framework.
Um, there, uh, if we, again,
to take the most recent weather events,
and we could take it back to Cyclone Gabriel
or use these most recent ones that have just, uh, occurred
during January, um, what we've seen is that
often Har Maia, some of those that are most impacting,
if we look at Har Maori, over 80% of Har
and I mean Maori communities, uh, where the et cetera,
over 80% of them are most susceptible
to climate change and climate impacts.
We go up the coast, uh,
and we see communities, uh, like Fadi, Codi, uh, all of
that top of the East Coast hit time and time again,
but they are small, they're rural,
and they're high Maori populated communities often, um,
that have, uh, aren't the priorities, uh, for, um,
uh, for resourcing, uh, for, uh,
the kinds of infrastructure that's required to enable these,
uh, communities to be resilient.
So an overarching T clause would ensure that all decisions
that are made during, uh,
both at all phases across the four Rs, would require
that consideration of Maori communities.
Um, at the forefront of mine recently,
during the most recent weather events,
we did see a shift in culture, um, by the Nima sister, um,
and Sedum, uh, groups, uh, at, at place.
But the shift in culture to include Maori communities
and decision making, uh, at both during response
and now during recovery, is discretionary.
So what we see now is that there's the inclusion of Maori,
uh, at the table, at the operational, uh,
at at in the operational groups, so
through kegs, and that's great.
However, uh, at the decision making at the, um,
in the joint committees still, uh,
Maori have been excluded from those groups.
Whilst we have had this cultural shift within the
administrative organizations, Nima
and the Sedum groups, et cetera, discretion isn't enough
to ensure that there is the sustainability around ensuring
that Maori communities are seen, uh, throughout all,
all stages of an emergency.
What we've advocated for is
that Maori hardwired into the legislation at both
that joint committee level and at the, uh, segs level.
Did that just come up with a funny, um,
background for you guys?
That did for me? Yeah. There were fireworks.
Yeah, they were, eh, because I did a thumbs up.
I'm not gonna do that again. Um, um,
so look, for us, this is a fundamental point, is
that in absence of being at the decision making tables at
that joint committee level, we are still not
able to make, um, informed decisions about,
or actually decision makers more generally aren't able
to make informed decisions about the specific needs
of Maori communities.
And that has been a challenge.
These were recommendations that have been made over several,
several, several years that Maori are embedded at
that governance level at the JC level.
And the fact that it hasn't been done in this legislation we
see is, or this bill is
undermines those recommendations from multiple reports.
There is the ability to do it through
ordinary local government legislation.
You can have, you can call members onto joint committees,
um, through, uh, local, uh, government, uh,
committee structures, or it could have been
hardwired into this bill.
We say that it must be
because we cannot rely on cultural shifts in organizations
to sustain the participation of Maori, uh,
at all phases of the legislation.
Um, in addition, when we look to the way in which, um,
uh, the way in which the director general, uh, must prepare,
uh, the plans for the emergency management system, uh,
the emergency management strategy, sorry,
and the emergency management plan
and the other national level planning instruments
and policies, we recommend that the, that the
director must be advised on specific Maori rights
and interests through some kind of mechanism, whether
that's a, an advisory group
or a, a, a, um, a, a structure
that ensures that Maori rights interests,
but more generally, ma Maori needs in har Maori
that are the most susceptible to some
of these severe weather events are embedded into the
thinking and the system
and the mechanisms that make the system work.
Uh, we've also advocated for
expanding recovery powers
to include time limited risk-based legislative tools
for things like the removal of temporary,
temporary housing and flood mitigation.
These, uh, recommendations are based, again,
off the experiences in Cyclone Gabriel.
I referenced just prior the community of aka, uh, the way
that they were able to lift those over 60 homes,
and that small community
of aka was relying on those time limited
risk-based legislative tools.
And those were ordering councils.
And those have been dealt
with a little bit in the resource management reforms.
But we say that the, that they should,
that there should be tools that are also expressly, um,
inserted into this piece of legislation to ensure
that the recovery phases that again, uh, have a long tail,
uh, that, um, again, uh,
where Maori not at the table,
those communities are often overlooked and not seen.
Uh, and the needs of those communities, like I said,
often rural based communities
that don't attract the infrastructure, the resources
that are required to ensure the resilience
of those communities.
We say that there needs to be tools hardwired into this bill
to enable the Maori to be at the table, to ensure
that those recovery phases, um, will enable things like
that immediate debris removal,
that immediate temporary housing that's required,
and that immediate flood mitigation.
Thank you so much. Uh, kitty,
we have actually run out of time.
Um, but that was a really clear submission
and your written submission was also really clear as well.
And I think given your expertise
and experience in this area, it was really good
for the committee to hear from you.
So thank you so much, uh, for your submission on behalf
of the Iwi Chairs Forum, uh,
it was great having you with us today.
Cheers. And I hope you liked the fireworks.
Yeah, that was, that was cool. We actually got trans power
next, so, um, oh, good.
See if they can, some special effects as well.
Uh, welcome Trans Power.
Thank you so much for joining us.
Sorry we're running a couple of minutes late,
but we do have a copy of your written submission
and we've got 10 minutes to hear from you. So over to you.
Great. Thank you. So thank you for the opportunity
to appear before the select committee.
I'm Joe Moore, senior Corporate Council,
and with me is Julian Morton, our strategy, performance
and risk manager, and Andrew Ton,
our senior principal engineer.
As you'll be aware, we're the owner
and operator of the National Grid,
and we're affected by events that give rise
to states of emergency.
We attend the regional
and National Lifelines meetings, and Mr.
Renton, one of the electricity industry representatives in
the bunker during states
of emergency like the Christchurch Earthquakes and Gabriel.
So we've lodged a brief submission on the bill,
and today we want to touch on three points
that we raised in our submission.
Um, firstly is clause 2 1 2 in relation to the power
for the minister to make rules on a broad range of matters.
And these include technical data
and data standards, performance standards,
operating practices, procedures and systems.
And it's unclear how those rules could impact
on trans power's operations.
But we are particularly concerned
that the rules could result in prescriptive frameworks.
Um, and, uh, as a result, we believe
that transparent other infrastructure operators need
to be involved in the rule making process,
and that the process should be robust.
So what we've done in our, in our submission is suggested
some ways that the rule making process
could be made more robust.
Um, we suggest that consultation, uh, should be mandatory
and there should be a reasonable
period to make a submission.
Um, we've also suggested
that consultation should be on the actual rule
that is proposed at the moment.
Uh, consultation needs to be, uh,
carried out if there's an intention to make a rule,
and it needs to be on the objective of,
of the rule rather than the actual drafting.
And in, in, in a separate RMA context context, recently,
we've, we've had a, in a situation where the rule
that was drafted, uh, didn't actually, um, meet the aims
of the objective for the rule.
So I think with our involvement, we could make sure
that the rules are fit for purpose.
So I'll pass on to Mr. Morton.
Yes. Uh, thank you. Uh, I mean, the second point we'd like
to make is, uh, relates to clause 74 A, which is
around the duty on essential infrastructure providers.
Uh, I mean, it's,
it is basically saying essential infra infrastructure is
able to, uh, provide the fullest extent, uh, possible
after an emergency.
Um, but it is a very broad definition, uh, on,
on infrastructure, um, and the components of infrastructure.
And we are concerned that maybe the bill will be sort of,
uh, re perceived as re as requiring just hardening
of infrastructure when, you know, sometimes
that may not be warranted.
And we should be focusing on the service
that we can provide, uh, rather than the, uh,
the infrastructure alone.
So we suggest, uh, some amendments in our submission to,
to talk about the, the restoration of service
'cause that's what matters to people, um, uh,
rather than the infrastructure components.
I'll hand over to Andrew.
Uh, thanks Julian. As somebody
who leads a team in the BUN bunker during an event, I'd like
to reinforce what Julian says, that it's the service
that matters, um,
because that's what we're trying to get back to people.
And you can either deliver the service
through the service mandate or infrastructure,
and it is a mix.
Uh, I, I don't, uh,
I don't underwrite your challenge in trying
to get the balance right between infrastructure and service.
So it is a mix. And that goes nicely to the point
that I'd like to make, uh, which is,
I think in schedule three, the list
of essential infrastructure providers,
we are missing two key of them.
And from recent events, flood protection services is one,
and the early warning and monitoring services is another.
So the protection services, monitoring
and warning systems, you think of them for tsunamis
and earthquakes and water levels and magnetometers
and volcanic hazards, they're kind of critical
for protecting and managing the real time impacts of
that event on, on many essential services
and on communities such as the grid and,
and homes and businesses.
So flooding, we've seen those severe impacts recently
through Gabrielle, where even some
of our assets were taken out through the, uh,
less than stellar performance of the flood protection, uh,
systems and barriers.
So we think they are crucial to being inside is captured
as infrastructure where it works well.
We've seen that work at Edgecomb where the barriers
and defenses were improved
and assets were protected where they weren't, the houses
were, were subject to flooding.
And then the early warning and monitoring systems.
So the essential for disaster risk reduction in readiness,
that lets us see the flood levels rising,
the flows increasing.
They provide timely information to mitigate the impacts
of the hazard, be it a laha or,
or whatever it happens to be.
And we rely on that information
and data from those monitoring services
and systems to forecast and provide warnings
and to be ready for events
and actually to actively respond in real time
during the changing environment
during which an event is playing out presently.
All of those warning systems are not hard coded
or identified anywhere in any legislation
as being important.
And therefore, councils
and everybody else are brutally tied to best endeavors,
which doesn't help if you're trying to build a system
to respond in a better way.
So that's it from us.
I think we're up for questions, aren't we? Yep. Happy to
Take questions.
Thank you so much, and thanks all for squeezing into our,
um, our little, uh, submission box there.
Um, I just, I think when I was reading
through your submission, one thing
that struck me was the review that you wanted,
the inconsistency between the, um, regulatory regime
that is currently in place in the bill,
and also wanting to look at the,
at the Commerce Commission and their role.
And I just wanted to know in terms of, um, specific ch do,
do you think it's possible for us to make specific changes
that will alleviate some of those concerns within this, um,
bill and, and especially in terms of that inconsistencies,
uh, with the regulatory regime?
I think that that is one thing we are concerned about,
and I guess we are concerned about particularly
what isn't stated in the bill and what comes next.
I think, um, you know, each individual piece
of legislation can cut across the other.
I guess it would be useful, I think for us, um,
as Julian said, we don't wanna be in a position
where we are forced to harden assets when
that may not be required.
We don't want to have to, I guess, have a gold plated grid
that's connecting to, you know, an EDB that isn't
of the same standard because
that's just costing electricity consumers more money,
but not affecting the actual,
the actual service at the end of the line.
So I think it might be useful if there could be some
consideration of those other regulatory regimes for those
of us that are subject to them.
Um, that could be in the rule making power,
it could be in a number of provisions in the bill.
We could give some consideration to where those,
those references could be, um, if that was useful,
and provide that in writing as a follow up.
Um, yeah, we'll definitely, um, follow up with advisors on
that specific issue.
Um, but if you had anything that you, in addition
that you wanted to provide to us,
that might be the assistance, that would be really helpful.
Uh, I'll just check with other, um,
members if they've got any questions for you
before we finish up.
No, that looks, um, looks like you've covered everything,
so thank you so much for, for joining us today, um,
at the end of, well, towards the end of our long day
of submissions and for preparing a very detailed
submission. We really appreciate it.
Awesome. Thank you. Thank you so much.
Thank you. So we've got Kim here next from the New Zealand
Telecommunications Forum.
Sorry. Yeah, our camera had turned us off. No,
No, no worries. That's, um,
you're very
efficient with turning on your camera.
Uh, thank you for joining us today.
We've received a copy of your written submission
and we've got 10 minutes to hear from you today
in relation to your oral submission. So over to you.
Fabulous. Thank you. I'll just introduce myself.
I wasn't on the list. I'm Paul Lin, I'm the Chief Executive
of the Telecommunications Forum.
Uh, Kim is, uh, Kim Cony Stone is our policy director.
I'll get her to run through the, um, the, some
of the elements from our submission
and then I'm available for questions, um, regarding our role
as sector coordinating entity, if you have any at the end.
But I'll end over to Kim. Thanks so much.
Thank you. Uh, thanks Paul.
And before we get going, just a quick shout out
to everyone who's worked on this bill.
We appreciate so much.
Policy work and drafting has been done in a short time
and we really appreciate the opportunities we've had
for engagement and the lead up with nema.
So thanks so much for that.
And you would seen from our submission,
we are broadly supportive of this bill, bill,
but there's just a few areas we think need some tweaking
to clarify responsibilities
and make sure there's effective coordination.
And there's five meters from our submission that we'd like
to highlight this afternoon.
And they concern, first up the definitions
of essential infrastructure, then the power
of the director general to make guidelines
and so forth, um,
concerning essential infrastructure emergency plans, uh,
some of the regulation and rulemaking powers.
We also want to touch on the importance
of having some standardization and coordination
and information requests.
And then we'll have a few remarks about
sector response plans.
So those are our five things. Uh, so first up definitions.
Um, across our membership there was a bit of uncertainty,
um, concerning the new set of definitions
for essential infrastructure.
And our question is whether these definitions are just
intended to expand the type
of essential infrastructure providers that will be subject
to the regime, or whether
including these definitions would actually change the nature
of duties for existing lifeline utilities.
But during the consultation
and the consultation document that came out,
it was explained to us that the move from lifeline utility
to essential infrastructure was just
to bring more essential services into the fold,
including some of those that trans power talked about.
So we would really like some clarity on this question,
and perhaps this is something the committee could get some
advice from your officials on.
Um, if the intent is to change the duties
through the definitions,
it would be great if essential infrastructure could be
informed of that and perhaps given the opportunity
for some follow up comments.
Our second issue concerns powers
to direct essential infrastructure, um,
emergency management plans.
Uh, clause 15 gets some of those powers
to the director general, and Clause two 10 has the companion
regulation making power.
Uh, you'll see in our submission,
we've proposed some amendments
to better define the scope of these powers.
Um, for us, the key is
to make the powers more outcomes focused
and not overly prescriptive.
Um, we think if they're too prescriptive, they run the risk
of limiting the ability of essential infrastructure
to respond operationally.
So, for example, you know, a power to specify the issues
that must be addressed through a plan
that's quite reasonable,
but not how those issues should be addressed operationally.
Something that that's something we think the, um,
infrastructure provider has more knowledge of.
Um, we've also made a proposal
that the director general wouldn't use the
regulation making power.
Sorry. The minister wouldn't use the regulation making power
unless the director had first tried guidance or standards.
So the idea there is it's just good practice to start
with your voluntary or your non-GI approaches.
We think that some similar issues could arise
with the rulemaking power and clause two 12.
So this is our third issue.
Um, while most of the topics we think are quite appropriate
for rulemaking, we are a little bit concerned about the
inclusion of performance standards
and whether that could be interpreted to allow the minister
to make rules for planning for emergency levels of service,
which is also known as pay loss for short.
Um, advice from MB
and which is supported by the sector, is
that pay loss won't assure performance during an event,
and instead it could actually get in the way of our ability
to operate and collaborate during an emergency.
And we understand it was that reason
that the concept wasn't carried across from bill number one,
where it had been included.
Uh, so what we're asking chair is that the committee, um,
seek some advice on whether the rulemaking power could be
used to bring in these PLO standards.
And if it was, we would be proposing some amendments.
And we've discussed that in our submissions.
Um, also on the rulemaking, um, section,
we support the points that were just made by trans power
concerning consultation on draft rules.
Um, we think that's a really useful, uh, suggestion.
Our next issue concerns information requests.
Uh, as you know, section one 70 enables the director general
and emergency management committees
and a host of others to require information from essential
infrastructure providers.
And of course, information exchanges super important, um,
for emergency management.
However, we're just a bit worried
that without some standardization
and some coordination, network operators won't be able
to keep up with all of these requests
that we are getting from councils.
Emergency management groups, regional lifelines,
and even economic development agencies are
getting into the mix.
Um, the problem for us is that telco networks are national
and no two requests that we get from the regions,
um, are the same.
You know, we are getting requests for, uh,
information about hazards
and risks, the location of infrastructure,
what the asset management programs are,
what are the purchasing programs, um,
and say these requests are different from different regions.
The requesters are also asking for data
and information in different formats,
and then we end up with misunderstandings about
what the information requested actually means
for that requester.
They often will request information they can't use.
And it's really challenging for us
to get consistent information from the regions about the
hazards in the area that would inform our responses.
And sometimes there's no clarity on who would have access to
that information and how it would be used and secured.
But we're not here just to point out problems, um,
to address this issue and to ensure that councils
and emergency groups get all the information they need
from essential infrastructure.
We are proposing that the bill give the director general
and express power to require some standardization
and information requests.
We think this would make life a lot
easier for the requesters.
Um, we stop their frustration when we're not able
to provide everything and make it lot easier for us
to meet their needs.
Um, and we are also proposing
that Clause one 70 has a wee amendment so
that the information requests need to be in line
with the guidance or standards
that the director general comes out with.
Um, and we are also requesting their agencies in a region be
required to coordinate the information requests.
You know, so for example,
if there is an emergency management committee or a council
or a lifeline group, they're all wanting
to know about telcom information in their region,
could they come together, um, and coordinate that?
And perhaps that's a role that NEMA could play.
Um, our last topic that we just wanted to highlight
to you is about sector response plans.
As you know, clause 1 0 4 allows the director general
to develop these plans.
And in anticipation of this,
the TCF is already working on our plan for the telco sector.
Um, our proposal is that the bell be amended to say
that we're a sector plan already exists
and it meets the legislative requirements
or any guidance, um, that that plan should be adopted
as a sector plan under section 1 0 4.
And if a sector doesn't already have a plan
and there is a sector coordinating entity,
and they're keen to work together to develop that plan,
that they should get the option
to lead the development of it.
And the rationale for these suggestions is
that we think sector coordinating entities will have more
information about coordinating emergencies for that sector
'cause they've been doing it, um,
more information than nema.
NEMA of course, would be involved in
the development of the plan.
They'd be consulted,
and of course, the director general
would have an approval role.
And we think this approach would also help Nima with some
of their resourcing pressures.
Um, so thank you chair
and committee members for your attention.
We are happy to answer any questions.
Thank you so much, uh,
for your very detailed, um, submission.
We are almost out of time,
but I just had a quick question in relation
to your rules making powers, um, provisions.
I think at c you stated that, um, there was just an issue
around, uh, not wanting infrastructure providers to be
contained or constrained, um, and an emergency.
And is is that, uh, like what's the kind
of underlying concern there?
Is that just that you want to be able to, uh, respond
as flexible as possible,
or I just,
I just wanted wondered if you could
clarify that a little bit. You
Can give you an example. So
for example, the, the p loss thing that we mentioned
that might, um, those types of standards might say,
this is the order of things that you need to restore.
You know, so this service needs to go this, uh, number one,
number two, number three, and within these timeframes,
and you might get into an emergency that's not how,
it's not exactly how that standard imagined it.
And you would ideally need to do something different.
So for example, in that case, you need
to get your ho the hospital a in this region
back online first.
But if those standards are really prescriptive
and you've got to follow those things, you wouldn't be able
to have the flexibility to do what you really need
to do in an emergency. Mm-hmm.
I see. Thank you so much.
I think we are out of time now,
but thank you very much
for joining us, uh, both of you today.
We really appreciated it.
Thanks for the opportunity. Thank
You. Thank you so much.
Thank you.
We've got our, uh, next submitter here in Varo,
New Zealand services Limited.
Lawrence, welcome to the committee.
Hi. Thank you very much. Um, I, first of all, I apologize
for the quality of the camera, um, on the computer. I no
Worries it up, But we
Haven't changed. The most important thing
is that we can hear from you.
Uh, so, and we, and we have got, I should say,
we've got a copy of your Russian submission and,
and 10 minutes to hear from you.
Well, thank you. My name's Lawrence do,
and I'm the environmental manager for Enviro nz.
And with me is Car
and Rosser, our planner, um, enviro Nzs, the second largest
liquid and solid waste management company in New Zealand.
We operate a number of landfills that provide disposal
for waste, including waste from, um, disaster recovery.
And we also operate a fleet of trucks throughout the country
that transfer waste, including disaster waste
to appropriate facilities, um, including transfer stations,
um, landfills, hazardous waste treatment facilities,
disasters can generate large volumes of waste
that require removal, sorting, processing, and
or disposal, um, in a short period of time.
Uh, for example, a typical house that needs
to be DeVol demolished after a flood
or an earthquake can generate up
to 200 cubic meters of materials.
Um, and the contents of that house can be up
to 17 cubic meters.
That's approximately 15 trucks of material that needs
to be transported to a landfill or recycling facility.
So as one of the highest budgetary items in the recovery
after a disaster, um,
we are asking why solid waste isn't mentioned in the bill.
And I'll pass over to Karen. Continue.
Yeah. Um, obviously, uh, the bill introduces, uh,
essential infrastructure
and essential infrastructure providers, uh,
to recognize these entities, which, um,
obviously are needed in an emergency situation.
But, uh, and,
and we are, we know
that you've defined essential infrastructure
as infrastructure components necessary
to deliver an essential service where
that essential service is necessary for public order safety,
health national security,
or the function of economy of society.
Um, we think
that solid waste management is an essential service that,
um, needs to be, uh, in this mix.
And, um, and without,
because without it, uh, you, once you clear disaster debris,
um, you know, if you don't do it, uh,
disease can quickly take hold.
So that impacts public health.
Public safety can be impacted, uh, when you can't get, um,
safe access to property
or public spaces when, um, there's, um, waste to be, uh,
there's waste in the way.
So, um, the, the waste removal enables a rebuild
and is obviously then establishes economic stability.
So, um, we propose that, uh,
solid waste management services should be added
to schedule three, um, so that, uh, they become defined
as an essential infrastructure provider.
And, uh, and on that note, we've proposed two clauses to add
as a separate, um, part of Schedule three.
One is an entity that provides consented class one, two,
or three landfill
or a consented clean fill for the disposal
of waste materials.
And the other is an entity
that provides licensed waste collection, processing
and recycling facilities or, or services.
Um, so that's, so one is for the disposal, one is
for the collection and the processing
or sorting, um, of, of waste after a disaster.
I mean, this way you'd ensure that these, um, services,
um, are guess part of the planning and,
and they can, can then contribute, uh, to ensuring
that you've, you've got these services in place, um,
after a disaster as well.
So, um, under that, in that sense, we think that, uh,
obviously we, we've heard there's some issues
with section 74,
but in terms of the duties of, um,
essential infrastructure providers.
But, um, we do believe that, uh, the entities
as described can fulfill those duties, uh,
or your amended duties and, um,
and contributing to the sector plans.
Um, and undertaking plans to ensure
that landfills can still operate
after an emergency is, is quite,
is reasonably straightforward.
Um, and, um, participating, uh,
in emergency management strategies and plans can be done.
Uh, and, um, we can also provide technical advice on, on
how certain wastes need to be managed
after, uh, an emergency,
which depending on the waste can be quite quite technical.
So, um, yeah.
Um, also, if waste management providers are not declared
essential infrastructure providers,
then the protections from prosecution
or civil liability, um, do not cover instances
where facilities may need to
or are directed to accept disaster waste
that's not authorized under resource consents.
For example, um,
after a flood, there may be a requirement
to accept high Otis materials, um, such
as decomposing food waste
or animal carcasses for a short time.
Or, um, landfills
or other facilities may be required to operate, um,
outside their consented hours.
Or for example, if, uh, there's a lot of material that needs
to be moved
or disposed of quickly, um, there may need to be, you know,
24 hour operation for a, a certain number
of days or even weeks.
So we think that this needs to be amended in the bill
for emergency powers to work effectively,
and for waste management providers
to fully assist in a disaster situation.
There should be a clause that those dis uh, disposal
of waste to waste management facilities acting at the
direction of authorized emergency officials have protection
from liability under the RMA.
So, in conclusion, our main point is
that waste management providers should be listed as, um,
essential infrastructure providers,
and we're happy to answer any questions you may have.
Thank you, uh, very much.
I don't have any questions, but just to note that that's,
uh, I think the point, um, in relation
to the essential infrastructure is very well made
and it's, it's actually arisen a few times today in terms
of, um, the importance of dealing with waste
and the fact that we don't often, um, think of
that first off when we see an emergency.
So I think that's, um, incredibly clear in your submission.
I'll just check if other members have questions.
No, it looks like you've covered everything.
So thank you so much, uh, Lawrence
and Karen for your, um, submission and for joining us today.
We appreciate it.
Thanks for the opportunity. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you so much. Right.
We have our last matter of the day, uh,
which is the Malborough District Council,
so we'll just invite them to join the panel.
Welcome. We can see you there in the distance,
and I think you're off mute now too, so thank you so much.
We're, um, we're really,
uh, pleased to be able to hear from you.
We do have a copy of your written submission
and we've got 10 minutes to hear from you.
So over to you.
Uh, firstly, thank you very much to the panel
for hearing us this afternoon.
We appreciate it's, uh, a long
journey going through this process.
Uh, just introducing myself, first of all.
Uh, my name is Matt Kerr.
I'm the emergency services Manager
for Malborough District Council.
And with me this afternoon is my, uh, committee chair, uh,
councilor Brian Dawson, uh, who I'll hand over now to,
um, to lead off.
Uh, firstly thank you to the committee.
I'm, um, as an elected council.
I'm used to very long hearing day, so, um,
I admire your resilience and tenacity today for, um,
for the long day that you've had.
So, look, firstly, thank you for the opportunity
to present Borough District Council's submission on the
emergency management bill.
Um, I chair our emergency management committee,
and whilst we support the bill's reform intent,
we have submitted concerns about
how it will work in practice for councils like ours.
Um, my main concern is financial sustainability.
Uh, the bill creates substantial new obligations backed
by criminal penalties of up to $300,000,
yet contains no requirement for cost benefit analysis for
before imposing planning standards
and no consideration of implementation costs
and no commitment to central government funding support.
Uh, for mob 27,000 rate payers, even modest
mandated capabilities increases, um, uh, increases, um,
material rates, pressure, uh, we're not wanting to avoid,
um, necessary investment.
Of course, we are deeply committed to community safety,
but we need assurance
that mandated investments are evidence-based, proportionate
and supported where they exceed reasonable
current expectations.
Currently, the bill could place us in an impossible position
whereby we face prosecution for non-compliance
with ER Emergency Management Act requirements,
while simultaneously facing criticism
for rates increases necessary to achieve compliance,
all in the face of rates capping.
This is not, um, sustainable governance.
So we are requesting amendment to clause 100.
We're requiring cost benefit analysis
before planning standards are imposed in consideration
of central government funding
with standards mandate capabilities beyond, um,
current baselines.
But the compliance order, uh, regime allows the
Director General to issue legally binding orders backed
by CRI Criminal Pros prosecution without consoling the
committee before.
Considering our resource constraints
and providing opportunity for good faith resolution,
a committee struggling with resource limitations
face the same potential prosecution as one
that's willfully negligent,
that's procedurally unfair committee
and risks adversarial rather than partnership relationships.
We're requesting amendment
to cause 1 7 4 requiring notification minimum 20 days
to respond and consideration of reasonable efforts
and resource constraints before orders are issued.
We support strengthening iwi and community roles,
and MALBOROUGH has already effective iwi engagement
through our local arrangements.
However, clause 39 doesn't, um, specify
that EB nominate
or appoint their own representatives to the community.
Uh, emergency management coordinating executive groups.
This risk committee is appointing Maori persons without e
endorsement, undermining the treaty partnership.
So we're requesting a minor, the meaningful amendment
to Clause 39 re requiring that e nominate
or endorse representative.
It just seems logical. Clause 44 makes chief executives
responsible and accountable under this act for
resource coordination, even when delegated.
It's unclear whether this creates personal regulatory
reliability, potentially subjecting chief executives
to compliance orders for prosecution.
This matters for risk management.
Clarity is sought on whether this creates personal liability
exposure requiring specific insurance with indemnification.
We're requesting amendment clarifying this
as employment accountability to councilors employer
and not personal regulatory liability.
But this bill establishes a sound framework
that requires focused amendments on fiscal accountability
on natural justice and on the treaty partnership.
Without these, we risk unfunded mandates,
creating inequality with smaller communities,
often facing higher hazard exposure, a disadvantage
by the small rate payer base.
And with that, I'm gonna, uh, hand back to Matt,
who will address operational and technical, um, concerns
That Thanks. Nice Councilor
Dawson.
Uh, so I'm just mindful of time and,
and leading a little opportunity there for questions.
I'll speak primarily to an aspect
of risk reduction requiring, uh, clarity.
So clauses 28 and
and 42 seem to create a tension
that's subtle, but significant.
Uh, they assign hazard identification and risk assessment
and reduction responsibilities
to emergency management committees
seemingly duplicating work that's
already mandated elsewhere.
Risk reduction in New Zealand is not a single agency's job.
It's distributed across a range of acts, uh, for example,
the Building Act, um, fire
and Emergency Act, uh, biosecurity, the RMA
and the planning bill, which is currently, uh,
for consultation, uh, and others.
Uh, each agency has, uh, sorry, each agency owns its, uh,
domain and has associated obligations
and levers, uh, to ultimately give effect to risk reduction.
The emergency management committee's role could be
clarified, uh, as being
to understand the aggregate consequence of hazards
that those agencies or entities are mandated to manage, uh,
and if and when required
to coordinate preparedness response, uh,
and recovery around that.
Consequence. Picture Clauses 20 18 42 in their current
form ask emergency management committees
to step into the hazard identification, management
and reduction work, uh, that other agencies are mandated
to undertake risk
and duplication in generating a lack of clarity,
particularly where powers reside with other entities.
Uh, the planning bill requires, uh, spatial, uh,
regional spatial plans to identify natural hazards, uh,
from Malborough as unitary authority Clauses 28 42.
Uh, and the planning bill apply all applies
to the same organization,
but through, um, different legislative obligations.
Uh, the four RS framework can help us identify, uh, sorry,
help us clarify the situation
by drawing Sinclair boundaries.
Uh, the role of reduction being, identifying hazards,
assessing risk, implementing controls through, uh, land use
planning and the building, uh,
and building standards as a planning function.
Uh, so there's a place for that in the planning bill.
Uh, and there are other responsibilities that sit, um,
as I've alluded to with other agencies
that have a statutory responsibility, uh,
and tools to act, uh, reading this response
and recovery involving consequence assessment capability,
uh, building managing emergencies
and moving into the recovery space, uh,
are emergency management functions
that are perhaps a better aligned
to the emergency management committee,
which has a more appropriate, uh, risk reduction function,
uh, that might be advocating for those
with the responsibilities
and powers to perform their obligations.
Uh, and mini, excuse me, manage risk down
to a satisfactory level.
What emergency management committees, uh,
could be asking is, given
what we know about the hazards in our area,
what are the consequences for communities?
Is that an acceptable level of risk?
And how do we prepare for those risks?
Eventuated, perhaps this advocacy for understanding
and ABS acceptance of residual risk of consequences is
where risk reduction clarity could be improved
for the Emergency Management Committee.
In summary, on this point, uh, we're requesting
that clauses 28 and 42 be reframed for clarity
and to recognize that there are wider responsibilities
for risk reduction that sit across other legislation.
The committee's role might
therefore be better articulated as one
of risk reduction advocacy
and being satisfied with residual risks
that may require emergency management coordination
through readiness, response and recovery.
Moving briefly on to, uh, my second point
around catastrophic events, uh,
the bill provides excellent tools for local emergencies.
Uh, the control of powers remain comprehensive
and new additions like, uh, animal welfare entry
and warning liability protection are meaningful changes.
Uh, however, for catastrophic multi-region events like an
Alpine fault rupture affecting the entire south island,
I have the sense that there remains some gaps.
Resource mobilization, for example, the bill doesn't seem
to create, uh, or indicate, um,
national mutual aid arrangements or obligations
or mobilization authorities.
Uh, during Alpine event, uh,
the South Island emergency management groups would need
to act very fast and would need substantial North Island
assistance across a range of operational enablers.
Uh, currently there's no framework for coordinating
that mobilization, uh,
service restoration prioritization is another aspect
where multiple essential services may fail simultaneously.
Uh, again, it doesn't appear to be a framework
for prioritizing competing restoration needs.
So while such gaps could be viewed
as being operational in nature and part of the local, uh,
and national operational planning processes, um,
there'll be gaps that must be addressed in the National
Emergency Management Plan through implementation, uh,
and other policy mechanisms.
I anticipate that there'll be issues arising
that may need elevation to primary legislation in order
to rapidly and effectively enable the emergency management
system to respond on, uh, to the scaling severity
that we might experience under one
of our catastrophic scenarios in New Zealand.
So overall, the bill creates a good legislative framework,
but catastrophic event capability will need ongoing
development and potential updates to this bill
and ultimately the act.
So that, uh, concludes the points that we wish to raise
and we welcome any questions.
Thank you. Um, I think we have just run out of time now,
but I think that's partly because I was just looking
through your submission and, and what a detailed, um,
and fullsome submission that is in terms
of the recommendations that, um, you've made.
So we'll definitely get some advice, um, on some
of those recommendations that you have made.
And also some of them have been, uh, mirrored
by some other submitters as well in res in respect of some
of the definitional things as well.
So thank you so much for the time
and effort that you put into writing the submission
and presenting for us today. We really appreciate it.
Thanks for your time very much.
Thank you so much. Thank
you, uh, committee members.
We'll just now move on to our, um, other Zoom channel, uh,
to conclude today.
Thank you.